<span id="credits"></span>
= ''Credits'' =

'''Authors:''' Volker Bürkel and Christoph Safferling (Aurulentus), Timothy Ferguson (Alexander), Tim Goldbeck (Scipio), Daniel Kemler (Conscientia, Maris), Mark Lawford (Petalichus, Yestin), Pitt Murmann (Tolides), Saul Roberts (Gwidion), Mark Shirley (Hugh, Julia, Marcus Tauros, Persephone), Erik Tyrrell (Lambert, Ranulf)

'''Development, Editing, &amp; Project Management:''' David Chart '''Layout, Art Direction, &amp; Proofreading:''' Michelle Nephew '''Publisher:''' John Nephew

'''Cover Illustration:''' Grey Thornberry

'''Interior Art:''' Jason Cole, Keith Decesare, Gary McCluskey, Jeff Menges, Robert Scott

'''Ars Magica Fifth Edition Trade Dress:''' J. Scott Reeves '''Publisher's Special Thanks''': Jerry Corrick &amp; the gang at the Source.

'''First Round Playtesters:''' Donna Giltrap, Malcolm Harbrow, Aaron Hicks, Richard Love; Nicholas Peterson

'''Second Round Playtesters:''' Jason Fryer, Matt Dyson, Emily Dyson; Donna Giltrap, Malcolm Harbrow, Aaron Hicks, Richard Love; Matthew L. Seidl

<span id="editors-biography"></span>
==== '''Editor's Biography''' ====

David Chart has been the '''Ars Magica''' Line Editor for over seven years now, in which time the line has notably failed to implode or lose large amounts of money. Given the general situation of the roleplaying industry, he feels that this is an achievement to be proud of. Before he was Line Editor he wrote for the game, all the way back to Second Edition, and was even, briefly, one of the Secret Masters of '''Ars Magica'''. On becoming Line Editor, however, he dissolved that shadowy cabal as being inconsistent with his personal, arbitrary, and despotic control of every aspect of the line. When not attempting to herd '''Ars Magica''' authors, David teaches English in Japan, where he lives with his wife and young daughter. He would like to dedicate this book, and indeed the entire Fifth Edition line, to them.

'''Ars Magica''' players participate in a thriving fan community by subscribing to email discussion lists (like the Berkeley list), compiling archives of game material (such as Project Redcap), maintaining fan-created web sites, and running demos through Atlas Games' Special Ops program. To learn more, visit [http://www.atlas-games.com/ArM5 www.atlas-games.com/ArM5]. You can also participate in discussions of '''Ars Magica''' at the official Atlas Games forums located at forum.atlas-games.com.

Copyright 2011 Trident, Inc. d/b/a Atlas Games. All rights reserved. Reproduction of this work by any means without written permission from the publisher, except short excerpts for the purpose of reviews, is expressly prohibited.

'''Ars Magica''', Mythic Europe, and Charting New Realms of Imagination are trademarks of Trident, Inc. Order of Hermes, Tremere, and Doissetep are trademarks of White Wolf, Inc. and are used with permission.

DIGITAL VERSION 1.0

<span id="contents"></span>
= ''Contents'' =

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Introduction:
!
! Ignem Spells30
!
! Corpus49
!
|-
| Beyond the Expected
| 5
| Imaginem Spells30
|
| Herbam50
|
|-
|
|
| Mentem Spells30
|
| Mentem50
|
|-
|
|
| Terram Spells31
|
| Terram50
|
|-
| I. Alexander of Jerbiton
| 6
| Enchanted Items 31
|
| Enchanted Items 50
|
|-
|
|
| Apollo's Lyre31
|
| Tonatris50
|
|-
| Alexander's Animal Shapes 10
|
| Cooking Stone31
|
| Talisman: Troll's Wife 51
|
|-
| New Spells 12
|
| Cultellus31
|
|
|
|-
| Animal Spells12<br>Aquam Spells12
|
| Dico Calculus31<br>Ferramenta Glacies32
|
| VI. Julia of Ex Miscellanea
| 52
|-
| Auram Spells12
|
| Hermes' Horn32
|
| New Spells 56
|
|-
| Corpus Spells12
|
| Mjolnir's Equal32
|
| Animal Spells56
|
|-
| Herbam Spells13
|
| Shulpea's Bowl32
|
| Corpus Spells58
|
|-
| Ignem Spells13
|
| Traveler's Cloak32
|
| Herbam Spells58
|
|-
| Imaginem Spells14
|
| Vessel of Etain's Children32
|
| Enchanted Items 58
|
|-
| Mentem Spells14
|
| Vulcan's Favored32
|
| Loom of the Kabouters58
|
|-
| Terram Spells14
|
|
|
| The Fruit of the Loom59
|
|-
|
|
|
|
| Magical Cloth59
|
|-
| II. Aurulentus of Jerbiton
| 15
| IV. Gwidion of Verditius 3
| 3
| Talisman: Forfex Princeps 60
|
|-
|
|
| New Spells 38
|
|
|
|-
| Background Information 19
|
| Animal Spells38
|
| VII. Lambert of Merinita
| 61
|-
| Aurulentus and his Ancestors19
|
| Herbam Spells38
|
|
|
|-
| Longevity Breakthrough20
|
| Ignem Spells40
|
| New Spells 65
|
|-
| New Spells 20
|
| Imaginem Spells40
|
| Animal Spells65
|
|-
| Corpus20
|
| Terram Spells40
|
| Aquam Spells65
|
|-
| Imaginem22
|
| Enchanted Items 40
|
| Corpus Spells65
|
|-
| Enchanted Items 23
|
| Staff of Silent Forest Stride40
|
| Herbam Spells65
|
|-
| Army of the Infant23
|
| Stone Disk of Warmth of Wood40
|
| Mentem Spells65
|
|-
| Bachelor's Door23
|
| Stone Disk of Frosted Timber41
|
| Vim Spells68
|
|-
| Bed of Rapid Convalescence23
|
| Stone Disk of Evergreen41
|
| Enchanted Items 68
|
|-
| Comb of Aphrodite23
|
| Stone Disk of Controlled Growth41
|
| Coins of Loose-Tongued Patrons68
|
|-
| Communicationof the Lovers23
|
| Fresh Air Vines41
|
| Doorframe of the Wary Steward68
|
|-
| Crib with a Mother's Touch23
|
| Water Vines41
|
| Granary Chest69
|
|-
| Guardian of Decency24
|
| Wall of Iron Thorns41
|
| Token of the Harvest Evening69
|
|-
| Nappy without Nuisance24
|
| Sun Ivy42
|
|
|
|-
| Reunion of Lovers24
|
| Storm Tree42
|
| VIII. Maris of Tytalus
| 70
|-
| Soothe theMother's Anxiety24
|
| Poppy Beds42
|
|
|
|-
| The Face of Paris24
|
| The Boiling Bush42
|
| New Spells 75
|
|-
| Traveller's Comfort24
|
| Bath of the Yellow Roses42
|
| Animal Spells75
|
|-
|
|
| Tree Hive43
|
| Aquam Spells75
|
|-
| III. Conscientia of Bonisagus 25
|
| Ring of Mixed Compost43
|
| Herbam Spells75
|
|-
|
|
| Rings of Basketed Transport43
|
| Ignem Spells75
|
|-
| New Spells 28
|
| Talisman: Gwidion's Riding Tree 44
|
| Terram Spells75
|
|-
| Animal Spells28
|
|
|
| Enchanted Items 76
|
|-
| Auram Spells28
|
| V. Hugh of Flambeau
| 45
| Ever-Tempting Trap76
|
|-
| Corpus Spells28
|
|
|
| Eyeglass of Nereus76
|
|-
| Herbam Spells30
|
| New Spells 49
|
| Foul Weather's Bane76
|
|-
|
|
|
|
|
|
|}

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! List of Inserts
|-
| I. Alexander<br>Equipment for Alexander's Attendants11
|-
| II. Aurulentus<br>Familiar: Zeno the Tortoise19<br>The Prophecy: A Faerie Game?21<br>The Family Tree21
|-
| III<br>. Conscientia<br>New Flaw: Exciting Experimentation26<br>Familiar: Aureus the Exotic Bird27<br>Charged Items and Potions29<br>New Guideline: CrTe 1531
|-
| IV. Gwidion<br>The World Tree34<br>Enchanting Giant Plants43
|-
| V. Hugh<br>Familiar: Bathild the Magical Horse47<br>New Guideline: MuCo 549
|-
| VI. Julia<br>Familiar: Tetrix the Blackcock55<br>Clothing in the Thirteenth Century57
|-
| VII<br>. Lambert<br>Initiation into the<br>Mystery of Arcadian Travel62
|-
| VIII<br>. Maris<br>Ormurin Langi70<br>Voices in the Ocean77
|-
| IX. Marcus<br>New Virtue: Hermetic Metamorphosis83<br>Disembodied Leg84
|-
| X. Persephone<br>Persephone's Agents88<br>Companion: Kore90<br>New Guideline: ReTe 492
|-
| XI. Petalichus<br>Familiar: Idmon the Spider99
|-
| XII<br>. Ranulf<br>Pilum of Fire and<br>Other Common Spells110<br>New Guidelines: CrVi113
|-
| XIII<br>. Scipio<br>Story Seeds116, 119, 121<br>Performance Magic (Music)118<br>Glamour Spells118<br>Familiar: Felix the Lucky Fox123
|-
| XIV<br>. Tolides<br>New Virtues and Flaws128<br>Familiar: An Imp130<br>Magical Weapons134
|-
| XV<br>. Yestin<br>New Guideline: CrHe 15139
|}

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Gorget of Salty Breath76
! The Convenient Door104
|-
| The Nailed Down Chamber Pot76
| Greater Numerologist's Book104
|-
| Neptune's Anchors77
| Talisman: Distaff of Petalichus 105
|-
| Naiad's Cask77
|
|-
| Roll of Endless Rope77
|
|-
| Shroud of the Healed Body77
| XII. Ranulf of Flambeau<br>106
|-
| Tryggvason's Chart77
| New Spells 110
|-
| Talisman: Paregro Mare 78
| Ignem Spells110
|-
| Save Our Ship78
| Terram Spells113
|-
| Eye of the Storm78
| Vim Spells113
|-
| Ward the Drowning Waves78
| Enchanted Items 113
|-
|
| Ribbon of Arcane Preservation113
|-
| Control the Reckless Vessel78
| Chest of the Ember Seed114
|-
| Hull of Unbreakable Iron78
| Laboratory of Ranulf114
|-
| Helios' Companionship78
| Talisman: Staff of Ranulf 114
|-
|
|
|-
| IX. Marcus of Criamon<br>79
|
|-
| Original Research 82
| XIII. Scipio of Merinita<br>116
|-
| Animal Spells82
| New Spells 122
|-
| Corpus Spells84
| Auram Spells122
|-
| Vim Spells84
| Corpus Spells122
|-
| New Spells 85
| Herbam Spells124
|-
| Corpus Spells85
| Ignem Spells124
|-
| Enchanted Items 85
| Imaginem Spells124
|-
|
| Mentem Spells126
|-
| The Labyrinth of the Open Mind85
| Enchanted Items 126
|-
| Canopic Jar85
| Bottomless Bag126
|-
| The Mark of Protection86
| Talisman: The Eternally
|-
| Talisman: Bucephalos 86
| Changing Lyre 126
|-
|
|
|-
| X. Persephone of Tytalus<br>87
|
|-
| New Spells 91
| XIV. Tolides of Flambeau<br>127
|-
| Animal Spells91
| New Spells 131
|-
| Imaginem Spells91
| Corpus Spells131
|-
| Mentem Spells92
| Ignem Spells132
|-
| Terram Spells93
| Imaginem Spells133
|-
| Enchanted Items 93
| Vim Spells133
|-
| Coin of Mirth93
| Enchanted Items 134
|-
| Bracelet of Clandestine
| Arrows of Defeat134
|-
| Insignificance93
| Torus of Fire Protection134
|-
| Signet of Hallam93
| Poniard of Deliverance134
|-
| Pigeon Amulet94
| Sting of the Viper134
|-
| Fides Sororis94
| Source of Tranquillity135
|-
| Talisman: Amor Sororis 95
| Rod of Mutilation135
|-
|
| Talisman: Orb of
|-
|
| Immanent Darkness 135
|-
| XI. Petalichus of Verditus<br>96
|
|-
| New Spells 99
| XV. Yestin of Jerbiton<br>136
|-
| Animal Spells99
|
|-
| Corpus Spells101
| New Spells 139
|-
| Imaginem Spells101
| Herbam Spells139
|-
| Mentem Spells101
| Ignem Spells139
|-
| Vim Spells102
| Imaginem Spells140
|-
| Sample Rotes102
| Mentem Spells140
|-
| Enchanted Items 102
| Terram Spells141
|-
| Items of Quality102
| Vim Spells142
|-
| The Cloak of Authority103
| Enchanted Items 142
|-
| Sanctum Door Hanging103
| Cloak of Wilderness Refuge142
|-
| The Light of Fell Disease103
| Song Stones143
|-
| Dreams You Shall Not Wake From.104
| The Spear of Lleu143
|-
| The Map of Many Places104
| Talisman: Crwth of Yestin 143
|}

<span id="introduction"></span>
=== ''Introduction'' ===

<span id="beyond-the-expected"></span>
= ''Beyond the Expected'' =

Welcome to ''Magi of Hermes''. This book presents fifteen unique magi of the Order of Hermes, along with their magical creations, to be used in your saga.

'''Alexander of Jerbiton:''' A magus who spends his life exploring the deserts of North Africa, developing spells to change himself and his attendants into animals to better travel in those harsh lands.

'''Aurulentus of Jerbiton:''' This seventh son of a seventh son is deeply concerned with his family, and develops many spell effects concerned with health, fertility, and care for children as a result.

'''Conscientia of Bonisagus:''' This &quot;lab rat&quot; develops effects to order for other magi, to gather resources for her own research project that has yet to bear fruit.

'''Gwidion of Verditius:''' A master at magically enhancing plants, his greatest creation may be the living tree that serves as his home.

'''Hugh of Flambeau:''' A magus who relishes physical combat, and who has developed many spells and enchanted items to make him a more formidable opponent.

'''Julia of Ex Miscellanea:''' This weaver's faerie blood lets her produce enchanted cloth and clothing of the highest caliber, though she rejects her heritage and as a result is tormented by her fey ancestor — a spider prince.

'''Lambert of Merinita:''' This trader of goods and materials uses his magic to support his mercantile activities and his family, and to overcome the social handicap of his Gift.

'''Maris of Tytalus:''' A magus who lives at sea, constantly testing his magic against the raw fury of the elements, and searching beneath its waters for ancient magical sites.

'''Marcus of Criamon:''' This giant-blooded magus seeks to create living beings by combining the features of two or more existing creatures, with the minotaur as his final goal.

'''Persephone of Tytalus:''' Driven by vengeance against her pater, she and her disfigured sister use magic to enhance their network of agents, giving them a great deal of mundane influence.

'''Petalichus of Verditius:''' Spinning webs of intrigue through the use of secret Mysteries, this crafter of seemingly humble devices is as secretive, manipulative, and vindictive as his arachnid familiar implies.

'''Ranulf of Flambeau:''' This magus aims to master fire magic, developing a wide range of new spells and effects, including non-violent applications of this Art.

'''Scipio of Merinita:''' Casting his magic through music and illusion, this son of a faerie king searches for his true love despite his father's interference.

'''Tolides of Flambeau:''' The apprentice of a marched Infernalist, he is obsessed with darkness and cold as a result of the influence of demons that still surround him, waiting for him to fall.

'''Yestin of Jerbiton:''' A traveling bard, whose magic enhances his music and makes his journeys easier, even as he's plagued by a meddlesome faerie.

Rather than being &quot;stock&quot; characters, these magi go beyond the expected, redefining the standard for '''Ars Magica'''. From the rare to the extraordinary, they are provided with full statistics at Gauntlet and every fifteen years of their career thereafter. In addition, full descriptions are provided of their remarkable creations, both spells and enchanted items. As a result, this book can be used in two main ways.

First, it's a source of pre-generated magi of various levels of power. The characters could be used as player characters, or, more likely, as supporting cast in a saga. You could also change the names and personalities, and just use the statistics to save you the trouble of generating them yourself.

Second, it's a source of new spells and enchanted items. These can be used without using the related magus, either by having them be invented from scratch by player magi, or made the subject of Lab Texts available in your own saga.

In short, this book is a collection of magical resources for your saga, to be used as you see fit. Enjoy!

<span id="chapter-one"></span>
=== ''Chapter One'' ===

<span id="alexander-of-jerbiton"></span>
= ''Alexander of Jerbiton'' =

'''Concept:''' A magus who spends his life exploring the deserts of North Africa, developing spells to change himself and his attendants into animals to better travel in those harsh lands.

Even as an apprentice, Alexander was fascinated by the idea of traveling to North Africa and visiting its ruins. His indulgent master equipped him with the sorts of skills and spells that allow him to find trouble, but not necessarily overcome it. He rectifies this lack later in life.

Alexander of Jerbiton is of average height, with olive skin and dark hair. He is scrawny when young, becoming wiry as he ages. His skin becomes increasingly leathery and his face becomes more lined, due to his exposure to the heat of the Egyptian climate. He wears the clothing of the locals wherever he goes.

<span id="alexander-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Alexander at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre 0, Com +1, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex 0, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 21 (21) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0 (0) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (transforming humans into animals); Subtle Magic, Well-traveled*; Deficient Technique (Perdo); Weak Enchanter

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Curious +3, Practical +1 '''Reputations:''' None

'''Combat:''' (human shape)

''Brawl (fist):'' Init 0, Attack +1, Defense +1, Damage 0

''Brawl (bludgeon):'' Init 0, Attack +3, Defense

+1, Damage +2

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Arabic 3 (traveling), Artes Liberales 1 (geography), (Apprenticeship Covenant) Lore 1 (workshops), Athletics 1 (walking long distances), Awareness 1 (ambush), Bargain 2 (for food and lodging), Brawl 1 (in camel form), Carouse 1 (sailors), Charm 1 (merchants), Chirurgy 1 (self), Etiquette 1 (transformations into animals, and vice versa), Folk Ken 2 (festivals), Guile 1 (about origin), Latin 4 (writing), Magic Theory 3 (human transformations into animals), North Africa Lore 2 (covenants), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (folktales of magi), Parma Magica 1 (Terram), Sicilian 5 (pleasantries), Survival 1 (desert), Swim 1 (rivers)

'''Arts: Cr''' 5**, In** 5, '''Mu''' 9, '''Pe''' 0, '''Re''' 5; '''An''' 5**, Aq** 0, '''Au''' 0, '''Co''' 5**, He** 0**, Ig** 0, '''Im''' 0, '''Me''' 0, '''Te''' 0, '''Vi''' 0

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Alexander prefers cheap equipment he can discard if he decides to spend time wandering in animal form. His clothes are made entirely of animal products, so that they transform when he does.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Voice of the Bjornaer Magus'' (MuAn15/+11): Includes penalties for casting without speech. Alexander does not need to use gestures because of his Subtle Magic Virtue. Allows the magus to speak with a human voice in animal form, removing penalties for voiceless casting. See ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'' page 36 for details.

''Beast of Miniscule Proportions'' (MuAn 20/+16) *Circle of Beast Warding (*ReAn 5/+12) *Cloak of Duck's Feathers (*ReAq 5/+7) ''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+12)

''A Guardian of the Tombs'' (MuCo(An) 20/+21) ''The Desert Wanderer'' (MuCo(An) 25/+21) ''Disguise of the Transformed Image'' (MuIm 15/ +11) ''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+7)

'''Appearance:''' Alexander is an athletic young man of Mediterranean appearance. He wears cheap, easily replaced clothes.

'''Sigil''': While being cast, Alexander's spells create a hazy, shimmering effect like the air above a hot field of stones. He votes using a small statue of Thoth carved in ebony.

'''Design Notes:''' His design totals so far are: Abilities 300, Arts: 135, Spells: 115.

<span id="alexander-15-years"></span>
=== ''Alexander +15 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre 0, Com +1, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex 0, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 36 (35) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0 (0) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (transforming humans into animals); Subtle Magic, Well-traveled*; Deficient Technique (Perdo); Weak Enchanter

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Curious +3, Practical +2 '''Reputations:''' Noted writer of travel journals 1 (House Jerbiton)

'''Combat:''' (human shape)

''Brawl (fist):'' Init 0, Attack +1, Defense +1, Damage 0

''Brawl (bludgeon):'' Init 0, Attack +3, Defense +1, Damage +2

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Arabic 5 (traveling), Artes Libera-

les 1 (geography), (Apprenticeship Covenant) Lore 1 (workshops), Athletics 1 (walking long distances), Awareness 1 (ambush), Bargain 2 (for food and lodging), Brawl 1 (in camel form), Carouse 1 (sailors), Charm 1 (merchants), Chirurgy 1 (self), Etiquette 1 (magi), Ethiopian 1 (traders' speech), Folk Ken 2 (festivals), Guile 1 (about origin), Latin 4 (writing), Magic Theory 4 (human transformations into animals), North Africa Lore 5 (covenants), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (folktales of magi), Parma Magica 3 (Terram), Sicilian 5 (pleasantries), Survival 1 (desert), Swim 1 (rivers)

'''Arts: Cr''' 5**, In** 5, '''Mu''' 15 (15), '''Pe''' 5, '''Re''' 5; '''An''' 10**, Aq** 0, '''Au''' 0, '''Co''' 10**, He** 0**, Ig** 0, '''Im''' 0, '''Me''' 0, '''Te''' 0, '''Vi''' 0

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Alexander prefers cheap equipment he can discard if he decides to spend time wandering in animal form. His clothes are made entirely of animal products, so that they transform when he does.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Voice of the Bjornaer Magus'' (MuAn15/+27) ''Beast of Miniscule Proportions'' (MuAn 20/+27) *Circle of Beast Warding (*ReAn 5/+17)

\*Cloak of Duck's Feathers (*ReAq 5/+7)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+17)

''A Guardian of the Tombs'' (MuCo(An) 20/+37) ''The Desert Wanderer'' (MuCo(An) 25/+37)

''A Punishment for Brigands'' (MuCo(An) 40/+37): Mastery 1 (Penetration)

''The Shadow on the Sand'' (MuCo(An) 30/+37): Mastery 1 (Quiet Casting)

''Disguise of the Transformed Image'' (MuIm 15/+17) ''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+7)

''Trackless Step'' (ReTe 10/+7)

'''Appearance:''' Alexander is an athletic young man of Mediterranean appearance. He wears cheap, easily replaced clothes.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' Alexander develops new spells to aid him in his travels, while improving his skills. He arranges for a longevity ritual to be created for him, and spends two seasons on a dangerous quest for the Verditius who creates his first ritual. Alexander's statistics are 40 Experience points short of where they would be if he had remained at home, studying.

'''Design Notes:''' His design totals are now: Abilities: 300 + 160 = 460 total; Arts: 135 + 170 = 305 total; Spells: + 120 + 80 levels = 200 total.

<span id="magi-of-hermes"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="alexander-30-years"></span>
=== ''Alexander +30 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre 0, Com +1, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex 0, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 51 (40) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 1 (3) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (transforming humans into animals); Subtle Magic, Well-traveled*; Deficient Technique (Perdo); Weak Enchanter

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Curious +3, Practical +2 '''Reputations:''' Noted writer of travel journals 2 (House Jerbiton)

'''Combat:''' (human shape)

''Brawl (fist):'' Init 0, Attack +3, Defense +3, Damage 0

''Brawl (bludgeon):'' Init 0, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage +2

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Arabic 5 (traveling), Artes Liberales 1 (geography), (Apprenticeship Covenant) Lore 1 (workshops), Athletics 2 (walking long distances), Awareness 2 (ambush), Bargain 3 (for food and lodging), Brawl 3 (in animal form), Carouse 1 (sailors), Charm 2 (merchants), Chirurgy 2 (self), Etiquette 2 (magi), Ethiopian 3 (traders' speech), Ethiopian Lore 3 (churches), Folk Ken 2 (festivals), Guile 1 (about origin), (Home Covenant) Lore 2 (local mundanes), Intrigue 1 (about magi), Latin 4 (writing), Leadership 2 (grogs), Magic Theory 5 (human transformations into animals), North Africa Lore 5 (covenants), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (folktales of magi), Parma Magica 3 (Terram), Sicilian 5 (pleasantries), Survival 2 (desert), Swim 1 (rivers)

'''Arts: Cr''' 5**, In** 5, '''Mu''' 15 (15), '''Pe''' 5, '''Re''' 5; '''An''' 16 (9)''', Aq''' 0, '''Au''' 0, '''Co''' 10**, He** 0**, Ig** 0, '''Im''' 0, '''Me''' 0, '''Te''' 0, '''Vi''' 0

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Alexander prefers cheap equipment he can discard if he decides to spend time wandering in animal form. His clothes are made entirely of animal products, so that they transform when he does.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0

'''Spells Known:'''

''Recruiting A Tiny Phalanx'' (Cr(Re)An 35/+23) ''Voice of the Bjornaer Magus'' (MuAn 15/+33) ''Beast of Miniscule Proportions'' (MuAn 20/+33)

''Scales of the Scorpions'' (MuAn 40/+33)

''Circle of Beast Warding'' (ReAn 5/+23)

''The Gentle Beast'' (ReAn 25/+23)

\*Cloak of Duck's Feathers (*ReAq 5/+7)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+17)

''Eyes of the Housecats'' (MuCo(An) 20/+37)

''A Guardian of the Tombs'' (MuCo(An) 20/+37)

''The Desert Wanderer'' (MuCo(An) 25/+37)

''The Lurker in the Rushes'' (MuCo(An) 30/+37)

''The Shadow on the Sand'' (MuCo(An) 30/+37):

Mastery 1 (Quiet Casting)

''A Punishment for Brigands'' (MuCo(An) 40/+37): Mastery 1 (Penetration)

''A Source of Tremendous Pride'' (MuCo(An) 45/+37)

''Disguise of the Transformed Image'' (MuIm 15/+17) ''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+7)

''Trackless Step'' (ReTe 10/+7)

'''Appearance:''' Alexander is an athletic man of Mediterranean appearance. He wears cheap, easily replaced clothes, exclusively constructed of animal products.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' Alexander joins a covenant with excellent resources, and develops spells and abilities suitable for guiding groups of grogs. He has continued to prepare for an eventual expedition to Ethiopia.

'''Design Notes:''' Alexander's design totals are: Abilities: 460 + 195 = 655 total; Arts: 305 + 90 = 395 total; Spells: 205 + 190 = 395 total. Note that he gains 20 experience more than an average magus would in this period.

<span id="alexander-45-years"></span>
=== ''Alexander +45 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre 0, Com +1, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex 0, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 66 (47)

'''Decrepitude:''' 0

'''Warping Score:''' 2 (1)

'''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (transforming humans into animals); Subtle Magic, Welltraveled*; Deficient Technique (Perdo); Weak Enchanter

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Curious +3, Practical +2 '''Reputations:''' Noted writer about North African customs 3 (House Jerbiton)

'''Combat:''' (human shape)

''Brawl (fist):'' Init 0, Attack +3, Defense +3,

Damage 0

''Brawl (bludgeon):'' Init 0, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage +2

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Arabic 5 (traveling), Artes Liberales 2 (geography), (Apprenticeship Covenant) Lore 1 (workshops), Athletics 2 (walking long distances), Awareness 2 (ambush), Bargain 4 (for food and lodging), Brawl 3 (in animal form), Carouse 1 (sailors), Charm 2 (merchants), Chirurgy 2 (self), Etiquette 2 (magi), Ethiopian 3 (traders' speech), Ethiopian Lore 3 (churches), Folk Ken 2 (festivals), Guile 1 (about origin), (Home Covenant) Lore 3 (local mundanes), Intrigue 1 (about magi), Latin 5 (writing), Leadership 2 (grogs), Magic Theory 5 (human transformations into animals), North Africa Lore 5 (covenants), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (folktales of magi), Parma Magica 4 (Terram), Sicilian 5 (pleasantries), Survival 2 (desert), Swim 1 (rivers), Teaching (apprentices) 3

'''Arts: Cr''' 5**, In** 5, '''Mu''' 18, '''Pe''' 5, '''Re''' 10; '''An''' 16 (9)''', Aq''' 5, '''Au''' 6 (3), '''Co''' 14**, He** 5**, Ig** 5, '''Im''' 5, '''Me''' 5, '''Te''' 5, '''Vi''' 5

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Alexander prefers cheap equipment he can discard if he decides to spend time wandering in animal form. His clothes are made entirely of animal products, so that they transform when he does.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Recruiting A Tiny Phalanx'' (Cr(Re)An 35/+23)

''Voice of the Bjornaer Magus'' (MuAn15/+36)

''Beast of Miniscule Proportions'' (MuAn 20/+36)

''Scales of the Scorpions'' (MuAn 40/+36)

\*Circle of Beast Warding (*ReAn 5/+23)

''The Gentle Beast'' (ReAn 25/+28)

\*Cloak of Duck's Feathers (*ReAq 5/+17)

''Movement Within the Sirocco'' (ReAu 25/+18)

''Ward Against the Sirocco'' (ReAu 25/+18)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+21)

''Eyes of the Housecats'' (MuCo(An) 20/+46)

''A Guardian of the Tombs'' (MuCo(An) 20/+46)

''The Desert Wanderer'' (MuCo(An) 25/+46)

''The Lurker in the Rushes'' (MuCo(An) 30/+46)

''The Shadow on the Sand'' (MuCo(An) 30/+46): Mastery 1 (Quiet Casting)

''A Punishment for Brigands'' (MuCo(An) 40/+46):

Mastery 1 (Penetration) ''A Source of Tremendous Pride'' (MuCo(An)

45/+46) ''Disguise of the Transformed Image'' (MuIm 15/+25) ''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+17) ''Trackless Step'' (ReTe 10/+17)

'''Appearance:''' Alexander is an athletic man of Mediterranean appearance. He wears cheap, easily replaced clothes, exclusively constructed of animal products.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' Alexander pauses to take a familiar, but the animal dies before the ritual can be completed. He also begins broadening his arts, to allow him to take an apprentice. In the statistics above, he has trained a child for eight years. Alexander spends a year running errands for the magus who makes him a more mature longevity ritual. He also makes brief forays to Kushite ruins.

'''Design Notes:''' Alexander's design totals are: Abilities: 655 + 135 = 790 total; Arts: 395 + 243 = 638 total; Spells: 390 + 55 = 445 total.

<span id="alexander-60-years"></span>
=== ''Alexander +60 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre 0, Com +1, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex 0, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 81 (55)

'''Decrepitude:''' 0

'''Warping Score:''' 2 (5)

'''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (transforming humans into animals); Subtle Magic, Welltraveled*; Deficient Technique (Perdo); Weak Enchanter

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Curious +3, Practical +2 '''Reputations:''' Noted writer about North African customs 4 (House Jerbiton)

'''Combat:''' (human shape)

''Brawl (fist):'' Init 0, Attack +3, Defense +3, Damage 0

''Brawl (bludgeon):'' Init 0, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage +2

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Arabic 5 (traveling), Artes Liberales 3 (geography), (Apprenticeship Covenant) Lore 1 (workshops), Athletics 2 (walking long distances), Awareness 2 (ambush), Bargain 4 (for food and lodging), Brawl 3 (in animal form), Carouse 1 (sailors), Charm 2 (merchants), Chirurgy 2 (self), Etiquette 2 (magi), Ethiopian 4 (traders' speech), Ethiopian Lore 5 (churches), Folk Ken 3 (festivals), Guile

1 (about origin), (Home Covenant) Lore 3 (local mundanes), Intrigue 1 (about magi), Latin 5 (writing), Leadership 3 (grogs), Magic Theory 5 (human transformations into animals), North Africa Lore 5 (covenants), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (folktales of magi), Parma Magica 4 (Terram), Sicilian 5 (pleasantries), Survival 3 (desert), Swim 1 (rivers), Teaching (apprentices) 4

'''Arts: Cr''' 5**, In** 9, '''Mu''' 19, '''Pe''' 5, '''Re''' 10; '''An''' 17**, Aq** 5, '''Au''' 10, '''Co''' 15**, He** 5**, Ig** 5, '''Im''' 5, '''Me''' 5, '''Te''' 5, '''Vi''' 5

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Alexander prefers cheap equipment he can discard if he decides to spend time wandering in animal form. His clothes are made entirely of animal products, so that they transform when he does.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Recruiting A Tiny Phalanx'' (Cr(Re)An 35/+24) ''Sailor's Foretaste of the Morrow'' (InAn20/+21) ''Voice of the Bjornaer Magus'' (MuAn15/+38) ''Beast of Miniscule Proportions'' (MuAn 20/+38) ''Opening the Tome of the Animal's Mind'' (MuAn25/+38)

''Scales of the Scorpions'' (MuAn 40/+38) *Circle of Beast Warding (*ReAn 5/+29) ''The Gentle Beast'' (ReAn 25/+29)

\*Cloak of Duck's Feathers (*ReAq 5/+17)

''Movement within the Sirocco'' (ReAu 25/+22) ''Ward Against the Sirocco'' (ReAu 25/+22)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+22)

''Whispers Through the Black Gate''

(InCo(Me)15/+16)

''Eyes of the Housecats'' (MuCo(An) 20/+51) ''A Guardian of the Tombs'' (MuCo(An) 20/+51) ''The Desert Wanderer'' (MuCo(An) 25/+51)

''The Lurker in the Rushes'' (MuCo(An) 30/+51)

''The Shadow on the Sand'' (MuCo(An) 30/+51):

Mastery 1 (Quiet Casting) ''Retreat as Flying Vermin'' (MuAn(Co)35/+36)

''A Punishment for Brigands'' (MuCo(An) 40/+51): Mastery 1 (Penetration)

''A Source of Tremendous Pride'' (MuCo(An) 45/+51)

''Disguise of the Transformed Image'' (MuIm 15/+26) ''Trackless Step'' (ReTe 10/+17)

''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+17)

''Wizard's Reach (Animal)'' (MuVi30/+26)

'''Appearance:''' Alexander is an older man of lean, Mediterranean appearance. He wears cheap, easily replaced clothes, exclusively constructed of animal products.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' Alexander's apprentice has completed training. Alexander continues to focus on spells that aid expeditions.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-1"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

'''Design Notes:''' Alexander's design totals are: Abilities: 790 + 145 = 935 total; Arts: 638 + 115 = 753 total; Spells: 445 + 125 = 570 total. During this period Alexander's travels seriously reduce his study, and this slows his acquisition of experience markedly.

<span id="alexander-75-years"></span>
=== ''Alexander +75 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre 0, Com +1, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex 0, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 96 (62) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 2 (5) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (transforming humans into animals); Subtle Magic, Welltraveled*; Deficient Technique (Perdo); Weak Enchanter

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Curious +3, Practical +2 '''Reputations:''' Noted writer about North African and Kushite ruins 4 (House Jerbiton)

'''Combat:''' (human shape)

''Brawl (fist):'' Init 0, Attack +3, Defense +3, Damage 0

''Brawl (bludgeon):'' Init 0, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage +2

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Arabic 5 (traveling), Artes Liberales 4 (geography), (Apprenticeship Covenant) Lore 1 (workshops), Athletics 3 (walking long distances), Awareness 2 (ambush), Bargain 4 (for food and lodging), Brawl 3 (in animal form), Carouse 1 (sailors), Charm 2 (merchants), Chirurgy 2 (self), Concentration 3 (maintaining Muto spells), Etiquette 2 (magi), Ethiopian 4 (traders' speech), Ethiopian Lore 5 (churches), Finesse 3 (Muto), Folk Ken 3 (festivals), Guile 1 (about origin), (Home Covenant) Lore 3 (local mundanes), Intrigue 1 (about magi), Latin 5 (writing), Leadership 3 (grogs), Magic Theory 5 (human transformations into animals), North Africa Lore 5 (covenants), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (folktales of magi), Parma Magica 6 (Terram), Sicilian 5 (pleasantries), Survival 5 (desert), Swim 1 (rivers), Teaching (apprentices) 4

'''Arts: Cr''' 5**, In** 9, '''Mu''' 20, '''Pe''' 5, '''Re''' 10; '''An''' 17**, Aq** 5, '''Au''' 10, '''Co''' 15**, He** 5**, Ig** 5, '''Im''' 5, '''Me''' 5, '''Te''' 5, '''Vi''' 5

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Alexander prefers cheap equipment he can discard if he decides to spend time wandering in animal form. His clothes are made entirely of animal products, so that they transform when he does.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Recruiting A Tiny Phalanx'' (Cr(Re)An 35/+24) ''Sailor's Foretaste of the Morrow'' (InAn20/+21) ''Voice of the Bjornaer Magus'' (MuAn15/+39) ''Beast of Miniscule Proportions'' (MuAn 20/+39) ''Opening the Tome of the Animal's Mind'' (MuAn 25/+39)

\*Circle of Beast Warding (*ReAn 5/+29) ''The Gentle Beast'' (ReAn 25/+29) ''A Bag of Teeth'' (MuAq(An)20/+32) *Cloak of Duck's Feathers (*ReAq 5/+17) ''Movement within the Sirocco'' (ReAu 25/+22) ''Ward Against the Sirocco'' (ReAu 25/+22) ''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+22) ''Whispers Through the Black Gate''

''Scales of the Scorpions'' (MuAn 40/+39)

(InCo(Me)15/+16) ''Eyes of the Housecats'' (MuCo(An) 20/+52) ''A Guardian of the Tombs'' (MuCo(An) 20/+52) ''The Desert Wanderer'' (MuCo(An) 25/+52) ''The Lurker in the Rushes'' (MuCo(An) 30/+52) ''The Shadow on the Sand'' (MuCo(An) 30/+52):

Mastery 1 (Quiet Casting)

''Retreat as Flying Vermin'' (MuAn(Co)35/+52) ''A Punishment for Brigands'' (MuCo(An) 40/+52): Mastery 1 (Penetration)

''A Source of Tremendous Pride'' (MuCo(An) 45/+52)

''A Bag of Feathers'' (MuHe(An)35/+27 ''Conflagratious Lanyard'' (MuIg(An)30/+27) ''A Place of Recuperation'' (PeIg 15/+12)

''A Time For Slumber'' (PeIg5/|+12) ''The False Dune'' (MuIm5/+27)

''Disguise of the Transformed Image'' (MuIm 15/+27)

''The Petrine Deception'' (MuIm15/+27) ''Avoiding the Blame'' (MuMe15/+27)

''Mind of the Beast'' (MuMe(An)30/+27) ''Rapid Excavations'' (MuTe(Aq)30/+27)

''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+17)

''Trackless Step'' (ReTe 10/+17)

''Wizard's Reach (Animal)'' (MuVi30/+26)

'''Appearance:''' Alexander is an elderly man of weathered appearance. He wears cheap, easily replaced clothes, exclusively constructed of animal products.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' During this period Alexander all but abandons the development of his Arts, instead developing skills and spells for exploration.

'''Design Notes:''' Alexander's design totals are: Abilities: 935 + 210 = 1145 Total; Arts: 753 + 20 = 773 total; Spells: 570 + 205 = 775 total.

<span id="alexanders-animal-shapes"></span>
= ''Alexander's Animal Shapes'' =

The following animal shapes are generic. To modify them to suit a particular human, see the rules on page 23 of ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults''. The animals given below also reflect the daily experience of people who live in North Africa. Campaigns for which North Africa is a distant and legendary place may choose to make these animals more dangerous, for example by allowing cobras to spit venom, scorpions to kill more readily with their stingers, and crocodiles to snap people in half more easily.

<span id="asp-egyptian-cobra"></span>
=== ''Asp (Egyptian Cobra)'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Cun –1, Per –2, Pre –6, Com –6, Str –6, Sta +2, Dex +2, Qik +2

'''Size:''' –3

'''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' Ferocity (self defense),

Lightning Reflexes, Infamous

'''Qualities:''' Ambush Predator, Loathsome Ap-

pearance, Venomous

'''Reputations:''' Venomous +5 (much of Arabia), Venomous +3 (among the literati of Europe)

'''Combat:'''

''Bite:'' Init +2, Attack +8, Defense +6, Damage –5*

See ''Venomous Bite'' in Powers, below.

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1, (1–2), –3 (3–4), –5 (5–6) incapacitated (7+)

'''Abilities:''' Awareness 2 (prey), Brawl 2 (fangs), Hunt 4 (rodents), Stealth 4 (stalking prey), Survival 3 (local environment)

'''Powers:'''

''Venomous Bite'', 0 Points, Init 0. When the cobra attacks, compare its Attack Advantage to the victim's armor Protection (not his Soak). If the cobra's advantage is higher, the victim suffers the effects of asp bite venom as listed in the Poison Table on page 180 of '''ArM5''', regardless of whether the bite inflicts an actual wound. The Storyguide may adjust the required Attack Advantage for special circumstances: for instance, high boots might offer an effective Protection +3 against the

'''Appearance:''' The asp is a large snake, weighing up to 20 pounds and reaching three paces in length. When threatened it raises its hood, which is a hand wide, and sways. It does not spit its venom.

Asps are generally nocturnal, but are not so disadvantaged by daylight as to earn the Flaw of the same name.

<span id="bat"></span>
=== ''Bat'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Cun –1, Per +3, Pre 0, Com –2, Str –18, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik +11

'''Size:''' –9

'''Confidence Score:''' 0

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' Eyes of the Bat (see Powers, below)''',''' Nocturnal

'''Qualities:''' Accomplished Flyer, Sharp Ears '''Reputations:''' Servant of evil +1 (much of Europe)

'''Combat:'''

''Bite:'' Init +11, Attack +7, Defense +14, Damage –17

'''Soak:''' +0

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3,–5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': Incapacitated (1+)

'''Abilities:''' Athletics 5 (flying), Awareness 4 (food), Brawl 2 (dodging), Survival 3 (home terrain)

'''Powers:'''

''Eyes of the Bat,'' 0 points, Init 0: Bats see in much the same way as magi using the spell ''Eyes of the Bat.''

'''Appearance:''' Leathery flying rodents, attractive for those used to the strange aesthetic of the creatures. Bats are able to find their way in complete darkness, but find sunlight unpleasant.

In emergency situations, where food has been scarce, Alexander has occasionally turned his group into bats, fed them insects or tiny amounts of fruit, and then allowed the spell to lapse in the morning. A well-nourished bat transforms into a well-nourished human, so this extends an expedition's supplies markedly. Grogs find the thought of eating insects distasteful, but while in bat form their senses of smell and taste make insects a delicacy.

<span id="camel"></span>
=== ''Camel'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Cun –2, Per 0, Pre –4, Com –5, Str +1, Sta +3, Dex 0, Qik –2

'''Size:''' +2

'''Confidence Score: 0'''

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' Smell Water (see Powers, below), Survive Without Water (see Powers, below).

'''Qualities:''' Herd Animal

'''Reputations:''' Cranky +1 (much of Arabia) '''Combat:'''

''Kick:'' Init 0, Attack +4, Defense +2, Damage +2 '''Soak:''' +3

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0/0, –1/–1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1, (1–7), –3 (8–14), –5 (15–21) Incapacitated (22+)

'''Abilities:''' Athletics 4 (running), Awareness 3 (predators), Brawl 2 (dodging), Survival 3 (home terrain)

<span id="powers"></span>
==== '''Powers:''' ====

''Smell Water,'' 0 Points, Init 0: The camel can smell drinkable water for a distance of up to two miles.

''Survive Without Water'', 0 points, Init 0: The camel can survive without water for up to two weeks.

'''Appearance:''' Alexander becomes a dromedary, single-humped Arabian camel.

Camels are well adapted to arid environments. They can find water by smell: open water sources have the same distinct smell as the air after rain. Camels can survive without water for extended periods, and are able to travel in mild sandstorms without harm. Their hooves have a unique design that splays when they travel on loose-packed surfaces, like sand, so that they do not sink into it as deeply as a human or hoofed animal does. This allows them to travel more swiftly on sand than horses, and to be less fatigued by running on sand than other animals are.

<span id="crocodile"></span>
=== ''Crocodile'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Cun +1, Per 0, Pre –2, Com –5, Str 0, Sta 0, Dex +1, Qik +3

'''Size:''' +3

'''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' Ferocity (Ambush),

'''Qualities:''' Aggressive, Ambush Predator, Amphibious*, Camouflage**, Crushing jaws, Roll Attack***, Tough Hide

* * Crocodiles can hold their breath for half an hour if moderately active, and two hours if inactive.
* ** The ripple-dampening camouflage of crocodiles is effective even when they are moving slowly in water.
* *** See Powers section, below.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-2"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="equipment-for-alexanders-attendants"></span>
=== ''Equipment for Alexander's Attendants'' ===

Alexander's attendants are often transformed into animals. It is vital that his party have equipment that does not require requisites to transform.

'''Armor:''' Alexander's attendants usually wear quilted armor ('''ArM5''' page 176) made of woolen thread. An expert armorer would quickly determine that the armor had been made so that small pieces of metal that are usual in its construction have been replaced with pieces of bone.

'''Weapons:''' Alexander's grogs often lose their weapons when they change shape, if they are forced to flee. To compensate for this, some of his warriors carry large fighting knives and clubs made from animal bone, horn, or ivory with leather and beeswax grips. These weapons do –2 Damage compared to their steel counterparts in the tables on pages 176 and 177 of '''ArM5''', except daggers and knives, which do –1 Damage. All of these weapons are likely to break on botches.

'''Water:''' The greatest flaw in Alexander's transformations is that the water his grogs are carrying, in leather skins, does not transform when the skins do, and so it is always lost. He has tried various solutions to this problem, but none have proven promising. His troops always carry a little mead or kumis (fermented honey or milk), but that offers no protection against dehydration.

<span id="combat"></span>
==== '''Combat:''' ====

''Bite:'' Init +3*, Attack +10, Defense +9, Damage +6*

* * Gains +3 if it takes its prey by surprise, for the first round only (Ambush Predator).
* ** Includes a +3 bonus for Crushing Jaws: reflects the fact that although crocodiles are not particularly strong compared to humans, the muscles with which they bite down are tremendously powerful. The muscles which open its mouth are comparatively weak. A human may hold a crocodile's jaws closed with a successful Grapple.

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1, (1–8), –3 (9–16), –5 (17–24) Incapacitated (25+)

'''Abilities:''' Athletics 2 (short sprints and lunges), Awareness 3 (food), Brawl 5 (in water), Hunt 4 (prey), Stealth 4 (stalking prey), Survival 3 (river), Swim 2 (rivers)

'''Powers:'''

''Death Roll'': 0 points, Init +3: A crocodile that has successfully bitten a foe may roll in the following round. When a crocodile rolls, it either twists away a chunk of the flesh of its victim (doing +6 damage) or, if possible, drags its victim beneath the surface of the water. It then uses its Amphibious Quality to wait for the victim to drown. To prevent injury or submersion from a roll, the victim must treat this as a successful grappling attack with an Attack Advantage of 10. If a character is being drowned by a crocodile, the character may attempt to break free of the crocodile's jaws each round. This requires the character to overcome a successful Grapple attack with an Attack Advantage of 10. If the character does break free, the crocodile is likely to bite again.

'''Appearance:''' Crocodiles are very difficult to spot in the water, as they have special scales that prevent them leaving surface ripples when they swim, and are colored to provide camouflage.

Crocodiles have a sense of the movement of water around their bodies, which allows them to track nearby moving objects without looking at them.

<span id="lion"></span>
=== ''Lion'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Cun +1, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str +6, Sta +3, Dex +2, Qik +1

'''Size''': +2

'''Confidence Score''': 2 (6)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': Ferocity (self-defense), Improved Characteristics (x2), Puissant Brawl, Self-Confident, Tough, Proud, Weakness (submission)

'''Qualities:''' Aggressive, Ambush Predator, Crafty, Good Jumper, Hardy, Imposing Appearance, Large Claws, Large Teeth, Tough Hide*, Vocal

\* Tough Hide gives it a Protection of +2. '''Personality Traits:''' Brave +5, Fierce +5

'''Reputations''': Fierce (local) 4

'''Combat:'''

''Claws'': Init +1, Attack +15, Defense +12, Damage +10

''Bite'': Init +1, Attack +13, Defense +9, Damage +9

'''Soak:''' +8

'''Fatigue Levels''': OK, 0/0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–7), –3 (8–14), –5 (15– 21), Incapacitated (22–28), Dead (29+)

'''Abilities:''' Athletics 5 (pouncing), Awareness 2 (smell), Brawl 5 (claws), Hunt 4 (deer), Stealth 4 (stalking), Survival 5 (arid climates)

'''Appearance''': The lion is a legendary beast more often depicted in artwork than encountered in the flesh. It can weigh up to 490 pounds and have a body length of over ten feet. It has a short, broad muzzle with powerful jaws and teeth. Its coat is tawny and the male lion has a dark, shaggy mane. The fearsome roar of the lion can be heard from a great distance.

<span id="new-spells"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Alexander has developed the following new spells.

<span id="animal-spells"></span>
=== ''Animal Spells'' ===

<span id="recruiting-a-tiny-phalanx"></span>
==== '''Recruiting A Tiny Phalanx''' ====

Cr(Re)An 30 R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group

This spell allows Alexander to create a swarm of scorpions. The swarm, combined, has the mass of a human being. The spell has a Rego requisite, which allows Alexander to command the swarm to do things other than chase beetles and run from larger creatures. In dangerous areas, he often casts two ''Circles of Beast Warding'', one slightly larger than the other, around the area where his party is going to camp. He then pours scorpions into the ring this creates, and orders them to attack anyone else that crosses the ring, casting the spell multiple times if he feels it is necessary. This technique also has the advantage that if he botches the spell, and creates a swarm of enraged and uncontrollable scorpions, he need only wait safe behind his inner ''Circle of Beast Warding'' for them to disappear.

Scorpion venom is painful, but individual stings are rarely fatal for healthy people. In areas where scorpions are common, the allergy that causes their sting to be fatal may be taken as a Minor Flaw. An attacking swarm of scorpions does +10 damage automatically each round, but this can be Soaked normally.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Group, +1 Rego requisite)

<span id="scales-of-the-scorpions"></span>
==== '''Scales of the Scorpions''' ====

MuAn Level 40

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Group

Alexander uses this ability to plate friendly animals, including his grogs when transformed, in chitinous armor. These plates are enormous versions of the armor that protect scorpions. This grants +3 Soak.

(Base 15, +2 Voice, +1 Diameter, +2 Group)

<span id="aquam-spells"></span>
=== ''Aquam Spells'' ===

<span id="bag-of-teeth"></span>
==== '''Bag of Teeth''' ====

MuAq(An) 20

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

Transforms a pool of water into an animal tooth. When on expedition, Alexander often carries several of these teeth. They are not a perfect solution to water shortage, because Alexander, while young, cannot dispel this effect, so the water only becomes available when the spell expires. If forced to use his emergency water, Alexander prefers to first create a sanctuary using ''A Place of Recuperation'' and ''A Time for Slumber'', then ration his water by keeping his servants, and himself, in diminutive animal forms until the Bag of Teeth reverts to gallons of water.

Each tooth may become just under a hundred cubic feet of water. This means that the teeth destroy any closed container they are stored within when they change back. They are able to cause explosions, but Alexander has never considered their military potential.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +3 Moon, requisite free)

<span id="auram-spells"></span>
=== ''Auram Spells'' ===

<span id="clouds-of-obscuring-sand"></span>
==== '''Clouds of Obscuring Sand''' ====

CrAu 30 R: Sight, D: Sun, T: Group

to allow him to move freely through the storm, although navigation by sight remains difficult unless he takes bird form, using ''The Shadow on the Sand'', to rise above the affected area.

(Base 3, +3 Sight, +2 Sun +2 Group (for larger area))

<span id="movement-within-the-sirocco"></span>
=== '''Movement Within the Sirocco''' ===

ReAu 25

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Allows Alexander, or the person he touches, to operate in the worst possible sandstorms. Alexander uses it when a sudden storm occurs, so that he can then cast ''Ward Against the Sirocco''. It has also proven useful while battling some of the wind creatures that guard the Kushite ruins in which he has developed an interest.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="ward-against-the-sirocco"></span>
=== '''Ward Against the Sirocco''' ===

ReAu 25

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

Wards against sandstorms by repelling the breezes that carry dust. It is powerful enough to defend Alexander and his servants from the most powerful sandstorms.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Ring)

<span id="corpus-spells"></span>
=== ''Corpus Spells'' ===

<span id="eyes-of-the-housecats"></span>
==== '''Eyes of the Housecats''' ====

MuCo(An) 20

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group

The targets gain the ability to see as a cat sees, allowing them to operate normally in low-light conditions. Alexander prefers his group to travel at night when in desert locations, to avoid the heat in the middle of the day.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group, requisite free)

<span id="the-guardian-of-the-tombs"></span>
==== '''The Guardian of the Tombs''' ====

MuCo(An) 20 R: Per, D:Sun, T:Ind

When faced with animals that might feed upon his camel form, Alexander uses this spell to take the shape of a cobra. Many predators find snakes intimidating or too small to be suitable prey. While in snake form, Alexander can detect the movement of nearby animals through vibrations in the ground, and he has a poisonous bite. If Alexander bites something hollow, so that his poison is injected into it, the poison does not disappear when he returns to human form. Some of Alexander's grogs occasionally use his poison to envenom their arrows. Alexander has a serpent skin wristband that he uses as a physical focus for the spell, so that he can cancel it at will.

(Base 10, +2 Sun)

<span id="the-desert-wanderer"></span>
==== '''The Desert Wanderer''' ====

MuCo(An) 25 R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

Alexander uses this spell to transform into an Arabian camel. This allows him to travel through the arid regions of Northern Africa more easily than if he had human shape. In this form he has the innate abilities of a camel, which includes the ability to detect the direction and distance of water for many miles, by scent. He has a belt made of camel leather that acts as a focus for this spell, enabling him to dispel it at will.

(Base 10, +2 Sun, +1 for size change)

<span id="the-shadow-on-the-sand"></span>
=== '''The Shadow on the Sand''' ===

MuCo(An) 30 R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

The ability to take the shape of a vulture allows Alexander to forage for food, and travel swiftly over areas that do not interest him. Vultures have exceptionally keen eyesight, so he is able to observe distant events on the ground in this form. Vultures are also considered birds of ill-omen, and he has occasionally used this shape to unnerve mundanes. Alexander has a strand of vulture feathers that he uses as a physical prop to allow this spell to be canceled at will.

(Base 20, +2 Sun)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-3"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="retreat-as-flying-vermin"></span>
==== '''Retreat As Flying Vermin''' ====

Mu(Co)An 35 R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Circle

This spell allows Alexander to turn a group of people, and their Animal-based equipment, into bats. It was designed to be used as a spell that would allow his grogs to rapidly retreat from danger, but the effect Alexander desired is slightly beyond his skill, so he needs to draw a circle before the spell can be used. He plans to use it only in emergencies, because his grogs will lose those items of equipment that are not based on animal products when it is used, which includes their weapons. If forced to use this spell to flee a foe, Alexander plans to use ''Clouds of Obscuring Sand'', and perhaps ''Ward Against the Sirocco'' first. He has a piece of bat leather in a small bag of trinkets he always carries, to use as a physical prop if this spell is cast.

(Base 20, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="the-lurker-in-the-rushes"></span>
==== '''The Lurker in the Rushes''' ====

MuCo(An) 40 R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

This spell transforms Alexander, or someone he touches, into a crocodile. Crocodiles are fearsome foes in combat around water, and the stealth of the crocodile makes grogs that have experience with the form into useful amphibious or aquatic scouts. Alexander has a crocodile skin dagger scabbard, which

(Base 20, +1 Touch, +2 Sun. Crocodiles are treated as fish when selecting a base level for this spell, +1 great Size change)

<span id="a-punishment-for-brigands"></span>
=== '''A Punishment for Brigands''' ===

he uses to cancel the spell at will.

MuCo(An) 40 R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

This spell transforms a human into a mouse. While in mouse form, the victim of this spell may be affected by ''Circle of Beast Warding'', which prevents him or her from fleeing if cast swiftly enough. This allows the mouse to be gathered into a bag and transferred to a place of confinement, or casually destroyed.

(Base 10, +2 Voice +2 Sun, +2 Group)

<span id="a-source-of-tremendous-pride"></span>
==== '''A Source of Tremendous Pride''' ====

MuCo(An) 45 R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group Used to transform the covenant's ser-

(Base 10, +2 Voice +2 Sun +2 Group +1 for size change)

<span id="herbam-spells"></span>
=== ''Herbam Spells'' ===

<span id="bag-of-feathers"></span>
=== '''Bag of Feathers''' ===

MuHe(An) 35

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Group

This spell is used to lessen the load carried by expeditions, by transforming all of the food supply they must carry, excepting that required during the spell's duration, into feathers. In Alexander's case each type of food becomes a different color and pattern of feather, so that servants who travel with him learn to read which feather is which provision. Food in feather form does not spoil, although it often tastes slightly of chicken after it regains its original form. Note that the food does not change back when the caster wishes; without Perdo Vim magic, he must wait for the duration to end.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +3 Moon, +2 Group, +1 requisite (changes animal products into lighter animal products).

<span id="ignem-spells"></span>
=== ''Ignem Spells'' ===

<span id="conflagratious-lanyard"></span>
==== '''Conflagratious Lanyard''' ====

MuIg(An) 30

This is a spell Alexander designed to avenge a personal slight. This spell transforms a large campfire into a bootlace, glove, thong, lanyard, belt, or similar leather product, for Moon Duration. When the spell's duration expires, the campfire continues burning as a natural fire, if it has sufficient fuel and air. A person wearing the item suffers +5 Damage in the first round, and in

each subsequent round provided the fire has sufficient fuel to continue burning. Alexander appears to have used this spell to burn all of his rival's favorite clothes, by incinerating the contents of a closet. Rumors that the rival's ship was lost at sea with all hands have never been proven.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +3 Moon, requisite free)

<span id="a-time-for-slumber"></span>
==== '''A Time For Slumber''' ====

PeIg 5

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

When this spell is cast around a camp, it dims the blinding light of the desert sun. This allows grogs and animals to sleep more easily. Alexander uses it in conjunction with ''A Place of Recuperation'' when on expedition.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Ring)

<span id="a-place-of-recuperation"></span>
==== '''A Place of Recuperation''' ====

PeIg 15

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

When this spell is cast around a camp, it lowers the temperature within the site to that of a mild summer's day. Alexander uses it, in conjunction with ''A Time For Slumber'', to allow his expedition to rest during the hottest part of the day during desert travel.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Ring)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-4"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="imaginem-spells"></span>
=== ''Imaginem Spells'' ===

<span id="the-false-dune"></span>
==== '''The False Dune''' ====

MuIm Level 5

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

Sometimes Alexander can't just make an unnaturally cool, dark space, surrounded by a moat of scorpions, when he wants to camp. This spell changes the way his camp looks and sounds. He often makes it appear to be a sand dune or copse of trees.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Ring)

<span id="mentem-spells"></span>
=== ''Mentem Spells'' ===

<span id="avoiding-the-blame"></span>
==== '''Avoiding the Blame''' ====

MuMe 15

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

This spell allows Alexander to rewrite all of the target's memories concerning a length of time. Alexander uses this spell to misdirect mundane enemies, but its Duration is so brief that it must be used cautiously. It is suitable for assisting his servants, when in trouble with mundane authorities, to gain their freedom long enough to flee an area. It can also be used to trick rivals into social gaffes, which can harm their political position.

(Base 4, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

<span id="the-petrine-deception"></span>
==== '''The Petrine Deception''' ====

MuIm Level 15

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Group

This spell makes Alexander's grogs look and sound like small rocks. Alexander is unable to dispel his magic, and while in rock form his grogs cannot communicate with each other to co-ordinate attacks, so this spell dissipates when Alexander's concentration wavers.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Concentration, +2 Group)

<span id="terram-spells"></span>
=== ''Terram Spells'' ===

<span id="rapid-excavations"></span>
==== '''Rapid Excavations''' ====

MuTe(Aq) Level 30

This spell allows Alexander to turn large volumes of sand into water, which rapidly dissipates in the desert heat. Alexander uses this spell to excavate sites that have become sand-bound, and to disorient foes by making the ground they are standing on into a deep waterhole. This spell can affect one hundred cubic yards of sand. Alexander can alter the shape of the space affected with a Finesse Roll.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Part, +1 large target)

<span id="chapter-two"></span>
=== ''Chapter Two'' ===

<span id="aurulentus-of-jerbiton"></span>
= ''Aurulentus of Jerbiton'' =

'''Concept:''' This seventh son of a seventh son is deeply concerned with his family, and develops many spell effects concerned with health, fertility, and care for children as a result.

This is the story of Aurulentus of Jerbiton, an unusual magus as he comes from a family of mages. Aurulentus is a seventh son, an auspicious fate. But not only that, his father was also a seventh son, as was his grandfather. In fact, Aurulentus is the fifth continuous generation of seventh sons. A prophecy was once made to his ancestors that the seventh son in the seventh generation would become a powerful magus and be able to reshape magic. Ever since, the family has used numerous means to ensure that in every generation seven sons are born and raised with the prophecy in mind.

It is a story of many generations of hope and struggle, differing views and planning. Aurulentus can expect to witness the heralded powerful magus: his grandson would be the sought-after seventh son in the seventh generation. Over the course of his life, Aurulentus specializes in Corpus magic and uses his special affinity with fertility to accomplish a noteworthy feat: he develops a Longevity Ritual that does not render him infertile and tries to extend this feat to other people's Longevity Rituals.

<span id="aurulentus-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Aurulentus at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre +3, Com +2, Str 0, Sta +1, Dex 0, Qik –2

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 20 (20) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0 '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Mythic Blood (Nymph of Artemis); Affinity with Corpus, Affinity with Creo, Improved Characteristics, Minor Magical Focus (fertility) (with Mythic Blood), Privileged Upbringing (free Jerbiton House Virtue), Skilled Parens, Special Circumstances (targeting family members), Student of Magic, Venus' Blessing; Driven (fulfill the family prophecy), True Love (Semira, his wife), Weak Magic Resistance (female casters); Obsessed (protect offspring, especially daughters) (with Mythic Blood), Mentor

'''Personality Traits:''' Further family cause +3, Loyal (wife) +3, Protective of his offspring +3

'''Reputations:''' Member of auspicious family +2 (Hermetic)

'''Combat:'''

''Fist:'' Init –2, Attack 0, Defense –2, Damage 0

'''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 1 (astronomy), (Area) Lore 2 (covenant surroundings), Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 1 (searching), Carouse 1 (staying sober), Charm 2 (his wife), Code of Hermes 1 (apprentices), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Etiquette 1 (nobility), Finesse 2 (precision), Folk Ken 1 (covenfolk), Guile 1

(lying to wife), High German 5 (Allemannisch), Intrigue 1 (gossip), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (5) (personalities), Latin 5 (Hermetic usage), Magic Lore 2+2 (Artemis), Magic Theory 4 (Corpus), Parma Magica 1 (Corpus), Penetration 1 (Corpus), Philosophiae 1 (moral philosophy), Profession: Scribe 1 (copying)

'''Arts: Cr''' 11**, In** 1**, Mu** 0**, Pe** 0**, Re** 1**; An** 0**, Aq** 0**, Au** 0**, Co** 11**, He** 0**, Ig** 0**, Im** 0**, Me** 5**, Te** 0**, Vi** 5

'''Powers:'''

''Oh Brother, Where Art Thou''?, 0 points, Init –2, Corpus: Aurulentus can sense where his relatives are (direction and approximate distance) and their state of health. This power only works on those descended by blood from his great-great-grandfather, Alexander, which by the time of Aurulentus is a considerable number. This effect has no penetration and requires neither words nor gestures. ''(InCo Base 3, +3 Target: Bloodline (ArM5, page 92), +1 to determine state of health)''

'''Twilight Scars:''' None

'''Equipment:''' A set of tasteful clothes, and a

wedding ring '''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+23)

''Chirurgeon's Healing Touch'' (CrCo 20/+23)

''Gentle Touch of the Purified Body'' (CrCo 20/+23) ''Purification of the Festering Body'' (CrCo 20/+23)

''Cheating the Reaper'' (CrCo 30/+23)

''Revealed Flaws of the Mortal Flesh'' (InCo 10/+13)

''Rise of the Feathery Body'' (ReCo 10/+13)

''Lamp without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+12) ''Phantasmal Troupe'' (CrIm 15/+12)

''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+2)

'''Appearance:''' A tall and handsome man with brown hair, hazel-colored eyes with a slight golden shimmer in them, and delicately chiselled facial features. Aurulentus is always clean shaven and wears tight-fitting clothes, to accentuate his athletic figure.

'''Casting Sigil:''' Cloak. When casting, a shimmer appears, seemingly cloaking the caster and/or the target. This can be a defensive, protective cloak or an aggressive armor, depending on the spell type.

'''Voting Sigil:''' A golden walnut, with a tiny sprout.

It is assumed that for every spell present in the '''ArM5''' rulebook a Lab Text either exists or was procured. All other spells and items were invented in the laboratory, except for the starting spell ''Phantasmal Troupe.''

<span id="magi-of-hermes-5"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="aurulentus-15-years"></span>
=== ''Aurulentus +15 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre +3, Com +2, Str 0, Sta +1, Dex 0, Qik –2

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 35 (34) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 3 (5) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Mythic Blood (Nymph of Artemis); Affinity with Corpus, Affinity with Creo, Improved Characteristics, Minor Magical Focus (fertility) (with Mythic Blood), Privileged Upbringing (free Jerbiton House Virtue), Skilled Parens, Special Circumstances (targeting family members), Student of Magic, Unaging (granted by Zeno), Venus' Blessing; Driven (fulfill the family prophecy), True Love (Semira, his wife), Weak Magic Resistance (female casters); Obsessed (protect offspring, especially daughters) (with Mythic Blood), Mentor

'''Personality Traits:''' Further family cause +3, Loyal (wife) +3, Protective of his offspring +3

'''Reputations:''' Member of auspicious family +2 (Hermetic)

'''Combat:'''

''Fist:'' Init –2, Attack 0, Defense –2, Damage 0 '''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (astronomy), (Area) Lore 2 (covenant surroundings), Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 1 (searching), Carouse 1 (staying sober), Charm 2 (his wife), Code of Hermes 1 (apprentices), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Etiquette 1 (nobility), Finesse 2 (precision), Folk Ken 1 (covenfolk), Guile 1 (lying to wife), High German 5 (Allemannisch), Intrigue 1 (gossip), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (personalities), Latin 5 (Hermetic usage), Magic Lore 2+2 (Artemis), Magic Theory 5 (Corpus), Parma Magica 1 (Corpus), Penetration 1 (Corpus), Philosophiae 1 (moral philosophy), Profession: Scribe 1 (copying)

'''Arts: Cr''' 15**, In** 10**, Mu** 10**, Pe** 10**, Re** 10**; An** 0**, Aq** 0**, Au** 1**, Co** 15**, He** 0**, Ig** 1**, Im** 10**, Me** 5(2)''', Te''' 1**, Vi** 5

'''Powers:'''

''Oh Brother, Where Art Thou''?, 0 points, Init –2, Corpus: Aurulentus can sense where his relatives are (direction and approximate distance) and their state of health. This power only works on those descended by blood from his great-great-grandfather, Alexander, which by the time of Aurulentus is a considerable number. This effect has no penetration and requires neither words nor gestures. ''(InCo Base 3, +3 Target: Bloodline (ArM5, page 92), +1 to determine state of health)''

'''Twilight Scars:''' Aurulentus can heal the toothache of small children with but a touch, and he has exceptionally strong facial hair growth.

'''Equipment:''' A set of tasteful clothes, and a wedding ring

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+31)

''Chirurgeon's Healing Touch'' (CrCo 20) +31)

''Gentle Touch of the Purified Body'' (CrCo 20/+31) ''Purification of the Festering Body'' (CrCo 20) +31)

''Widening the River Styx'' (CrCo 20/+31)

''Revealed Flaws of the Mortal Flesh'' (InCo 10/+26)

''Pose Clotho's Question'' (InCo 5/+26)

''Pose Nona's Question'' (InCo 10/+26)

''The Maculate Noblewoman'' (InCo 15/+36)

''Verifying the Presence of Artemis' Blessing'' (InCo 15/+36)

''Rise of the Feathery Body'' (ReCo 10/+26)

''Lamp without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+17)

''Phantasmal Troupe'' (CrIm 15/+26)

''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+12)

'''Appearance:''' A tall and handsome man with brown hair, hazel-colored eyes with a slight golden shimmer in them, and delicately chiselled facial features. Aurulentus is always clean shaven and wears tight-fitting clothes, to accentuate his athletic figure.

'''Activities in the past 15 years:''' Thirteen years were spent learning and two years (8 seasons) in the lab. At the age of 34, Aurulentus binds his familiar, a Tortoise named Zeno (after Zeno of Elea). The Bond Scores are: Bronze +3, Silver +1, Gold +1, for a CrCo Lab Total of 40. Zeno granted the virtue Unaging. Aurulentus invented the spells ''Pose Clotho's Question'' and ''Pose Nona's Question'' (both in a single season)'', Verifying the Presence of Artemis' Blessing, The Maculate Noblewoman'', and ''Widening the River Styx'' (re-invented twice in one season)'','' experimenting on all for his breakthrough research. He spent two seasons stabilizing his research.

<span id="aurulentus-30-years"></span>
=== ''Aurulentus +30 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre +3, Com +2, Str 0, Sta +1, Dex 0, Qik –2

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 50 (34) '''Decrepitude:''' 1 '''Warping Score:''' 4 (19) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Mythic Blood (Nymph of Artemis); Affinity with Corpus, Affinity with Creo, Improved Characteristics, Minor Magical Focus (fertility) (with Mythic Blood), Privileged Upbringing (free Jerbiton House Virtue), Skilled Parens, Special Circumstances (targeting family members), Student of Magic, Unaging (granted by Zeno), Venus' Blessing; Driven (fulfill the family prophecy), True Love (Semira, his wife), Weak Magic Resistance (female casters); Obsessed (protect offspring, especially daughters) (with Mythic Blood), Mentor

'''Personality Traits:''' Further family cause +3, Loyal (wife) +3, Protective of his offspring +3

'''Reputations:''' Member of auspicious family +2 (Hermetic)

'''Combat:'''

''Fist:'' Init –2, Attack 0, Defense –2, Damage 0 '''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (astronomy), (Area) Lore 2 (covenant surroundings), Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 2 (searching), Carouse 1 (staying sober), Charm 3 (his wife), Code of Hermes 1 (apprentices), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Etiquette 1 (nobility), Finesse 2 (precision), Folk Ken 1 (covenfolk), Greek 4 (archaic vocabulary), Guile 1 (lying to wife), High German 5 (Allemannisch), Intrigue 1 (gossip), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (personalities), Latin 5 (Hermetic usage), Leadership 1 (family members), Magic Lore 3+2 (Artemis), Magic Theory 6 (Corpus), Parma Magica 2 (Corpus), Penetration 1 (Corpus), Philosophiae 2 (moral philosophy), Profession: Scribe 1 (copying), Survival 1 (forests), Teaching 1 (one-on-one)

'''Arts: Cr''' 16(1)''', In''' 10**, Mu** 10**, Pe** 10**, Re** 11**; An** 5**, Aq** 5**, Au** 5**, Co** 16(1)''', He''' 5**, Ig** 5**, Im** 10**, Me** 6(2)''', Te''' 5**, Vi** 7(6)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-6"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

'''Powers:'''

''Oh Brother, Where Art Thou''?, 0 points, Init –2, Corpus: Aurulentus can sense where his relatives are (direction and approximate distance) and their state of health. This power only works on those descended by blood from his great-great-grandfather, Alexander, which by the time of Aurulentus is a considerable number. This effect has no penetration and requires neither words nor gestures. ''(InCo Base 3, +3 Target: Bloodline (ArM5, page 92), +1 to determine state of health)''

'''Twilight Scars:''' Aurulentus can heal the toothache of small children with but a touch, he has exceptionally strong facial hair growth, and dogs sense him as a cat and act accordingly.

'''Equipment:''' A set of tasteful clothes, and a wedding ring

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+33)

''Chirurgeon's Healing Touch'' (CrCo 20/+33) ''Gentle Touch of the Purified Body'' (CrCo 20/+33) ''Purification of the Festering Body'' (CrCo 20/+33) ''Widening the River Styx'' (CrCo 20/+33)

''Artemis' Fertility'' (CrCo 40/+49) ''Pose Clotho's Question'' (InCo 5/+27) ''Pose Nona's Question'' (InCo 10/+27)

''Revealed Flaws of the Mortal Flesh'' (InCo 10/+27)

''The Maculate Noblewoman'' (InCo 15/+37) ''Verifying the Presence of Artemis' Blessing'' (InCo 15/+27)

''Eyes of the Sage'' (InCo(Im) 30/+21) ''Bane of the Decrepit Body'' (PeCo 25/+27) ''Rise of the Feathery Body'' (ReCo 10/+28)

''Lamp without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+22)

''Phantasmal Troupe'' (CrIm 15/+28) ''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+17)

'''Appearance:''' A tall and handsome man with brown hair, hazel-colored eyes with a slight golden shimmer in them, and delicately chiselled facial features. Aurulentus is always clean shaven and wears tight-fitting clothes, to accentuate his athletic figure.

'''Activities in the past 15 years:''' First, five years were spent in the lab (20 seasons), as Aurulentus was getting desperate to finish his research. Semira is younger than him, but soon she would show signs of aging. Aurulentus spent two seasons inventing the spell ''Artemis' Fertility'', and a further two seasons re-inventing the same spell twice. The spell ''Bane of the Decrepit Body'' was learned and re-invented twice, additionally ''The Maculate Noblewoman'' was re-invented three times. Four seasons were spent on experimenting with eight Longevity Rituals, and a further four seasons on stabilizing the research efforts. The breakthrough is successfully stabilized! Aurulentus immediately created a Longevity Ritual for himself and his wife. Only after this is accomplished, he sets to empower the bond of his familiar with the power ''Mental Communication'' and invent the spell ''Eye of the Sage.'' The remaining 10 years were spent learning.

<span id="aurulentus-45-years"></span>
=== ''Aurulentus +45 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre +3, Com +2, Str 0, Sta +1, Dex 0, Qik –2

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 65 (34) '''Decrepitude:''' 1 '''Warping Score:''' 5 (24) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Mythic Blood (Nymph of Artemis); Affinity with Corpus, Affinity with Creo, Improved Characteristics, Minor Magical Focus (fertility) (with Mythic Blood), Privileged Upbringing (free Jerbiton House Virtue), Skilled Parens, Special Circumstances (targeting family members), Student of Magic, Unaging (granted by Zeno), Venus' Blessing; Driven (fulfill the family prophecy), True Love (Semira, his wife), Weak Magic Resistance (female casters); Obsessed (protect offspring, especially daughters) (with Mythic Blood), Mentor

'''Personality Traits:''' Further family cause +3, Loyal (wife) +3, Protective of his offspring +3

'''Reputations:''' Member of auspicious family +2 (Hermetic)

'''Combat:'''

''Fist:'' Init –2, Attack 0, Defense –2, Damage 0 '''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (astronomy), (Area) Lore 2 (covenant surroundings), Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 2 (searching), Carouse 1 (staying sober), Charm 3 (his wife), Code of Hermes 1 (apprentices), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Etiquette 1 (nobility), Finesse 3 (precision), Folk Ken 2 (covenfolk), Greek 4 (archaic vocabulary),

Guile 1 (lying to wife), High German 5 (Allemannisch), Intrigue 2 (gossip), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (personalities), Latin 5 (Hermetic usage), Leadership 1 (family members), Magic Lore 3+2 (Artemis), Magic Theory 7 (Corpus), Parma Magica 2 (Corpus), Penetration 2 (Corpus), Philosophiae 2 (moral philosophy), Profession: Scribe 1 (copying), Survival 1 (forests), Teaching 1 (one-on-one)

'''Arts: Cr''' 20(1)''', In''' 10**, Mu** 11**, Pe** 10**, Re** 12**; An** 10**, Aq** 5**, Au** 5**, Co** 20(1)''', He''' 7**, Ig** 5**, Im** 11**, Me** 10(2)''', Te''' 5**, Vi** 8(2)

<span id="powers-1"></span>
==== '''Powers:''' ====

''Oh Brother, Where Art Thou''?, 0 points, Init –2, Corpus: Aurulentus can sense where his relatives are (direction and approximate distance) and their state of health. This power only works on those descended by blood from his great-great-grandfather, Alexander, which by the time of Aurulentus is a considerable number. This effect has no penetration and requires neither words nor gestures. ''(InCo Base 3, +3 Target: Bloodline (ArM5, page 92), +1 to determine state of health)''

'''Twilight Scars:''' Aurulentus can heal the toothache of small children with but a touch, he has exceptionally strong facial hair growth, dogs sense him as a cat and act accordingly, and he never suffers from a hangover.

'''Equipment:''' A set of tasteful clothes, and a wedding ring

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+41) ''Chirurgeon's Healing Touch'' (CrCo 20/+41) ''Gentle Touch of the Purified Body'' (CrCo 20/+41) ''Purification of the Festering Body'' (CrCo 20/+41)

''Widening the River Styx'' (CrCo 20/+41) ''Severed Limb Made Whole'' (CrCo 25/+41)

''Blissful Sensations'' (CrCo 30/+41)

''Artemis' Fertility'' (CrCo 40/+61)

''Incantation of the Body Made Whole'' (CrCo 40/+41)

''Pose Clotho's Question'' (InCo 5/+31)

''Pose Nona's Question'' (InCo 10/+31)

''Revealed Flaws of the Mortal Flesh'' (InCo

10/+31)

''The Maculate Noblewoman'' (InCo 15/+41) ''Verifying the Presence of Artemis' Blessing'' (InCo

15/+31)

''Eyes of the Sage'' (InCo(Im) 30/+22)

''Ease the Suffering of Childbirth'' (MuCo 15/+32)

''Bane of the Decrepit Body'' (PeCo 25/+31)

''Rise of the Feathery Body'' (ReCo 10/+33)

''Hold Chur'' (ReCo 30/+33)

''Seven Leagues Stride'' (ReCo 30/+33)

''Seven Leagues Travel'' (ReCo 35/+33)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-7"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

''Bountiful Feast'' (CrHe 35/+35)

''Lamp without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+26) ''Phantasmal Troupe'' (CrIm 15/+32)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+22)

''Summoning the Distant Image'' (InIm 25/+22)

''Aura of Ennobled Presence'' (MuIm 10/+23)

''Comeliness of the Crone'' (MuIm 10/+23) ''Disguise of the Transformed Image'' (MuIm

15/+23)

''Words of Unbroken Silence'' (CrMe 10/+31) ''Memory of the Distant Dream'' (CrMe 20/+31)

''Sight of the Transparent Motive'' (InMe 10/+21) ''Pose the Silent Question'' (InMe 20/+21)

''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+18)

'''Appearance:''' A tall and handsome man with brown hair, hazel-colored eyes with a slight golden shimmer in them, and delicately chiselled facial features. Aurulentus is always clean shaven and wears tight-fitting clothes, to accentuate his athletic figure.

'''Activities in the past 15 years:''' Having accomplished his goal of finding a Longevity Ritual preserving the fertility of both his wife and himself, Aurulentus can now relax and turn to much-neglected standard Hermetic research. Ten years were spent learning and 5 years in the lab. Aurulentus catches up with spell inventions, learning the standard spells from lab texts. Additionally, he creates the items ''The Face of Paris'', ''Communication of the Lovers'', and ''Reunion of the Lovers.'' A season is also spent on writing up his research findings. Word spreads slowly of his success, but a few nearby magi show their interest in his works.

<span id="aurulentus-60-years"></span>
=== ''Aurulentus +60 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre +3, Com +2, Str 0, Sta +1, Dex 0, Qik –2

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 80 (34)

'''Decrepitude:''' 1 (2)

'''Warping Score:''' 6 (24)

'''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Mythic Blood (Nymph of Artemis); Affinity with Corpus, Affinity with Creo, Improved Characteristics, Minor Magical Focus (fertility) (with Mythic Blood), Privileged Upbringing (free Jerbiton House Virtue), Skilled Parens, Special Circumstances (targeting family members), Student of Magic, Unaging (granted by Zeno), Venus' Blessing; Driven (fulfill the family prophecy), True Love (Semira, his wife), Weak Magic

'''Personality Traits:''' Further family cause +3, Loyal (wife) +3, Protective of his offspring +3

'''Reputations:''' Member of auspicious family +2 (Hermetic)

<span id="combat-1"></span>
==== '''Combat:''' ====

''Fist:'' Init –2, Attack 0, Defense –2, Damage 0

'''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (astronomy), (Area) Lore 2 (covenant surroundings), Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 2 (searching), Carouse 1 (staying sober), Charm 3 (his wife), Code of Hermes 2 (apprentices), Concentration 3 (spell concentration), Etiquette 3 (nobility), Finesse 2 (precision), Folk Ken 2 (covenfolk), Greek 4 (archaic vocabulary), Guile 2 (lying to wife), High German 5 (Allemannisch), Intrigue 2 (10) (gossip), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (personalities), Latin 5 (Hermetic usage), Leadership 2 (family members), Magic Lore 4 (5)+2 (Artemis), Magic Theory 8 (Corpus), Parma Magica 2 (Corpus), Penetration 2 (Corpus), Philosophiae 2 (moral philosophy), Profession: Scribe 1 (copying), Survival 1 (forests), Teaching 2 (one-on-one)

'''Arts: Cr''' 21**, In** 12**, Mu** 11**, Pe** 10**, Re** 13**; An** 10**, Aq** 5**, Au** 5**, Co** 21**, He** 7**, Ig** 5**, Im** 11**, Me** 11(2)''', Te''' 5**, Vi** 10

<span id="powers-2"></span>
==== '''Powers:''' ====

''Oh Brother, Where Art Thou''?, 0 points, Init –2, Corpus: Aurulentus can sense where his relatives are (direction and approximate distance) and their state of health. This power only works on those descended by blood from his great-great-grandfather, Alexander, which by the time of Aurulentus is a considerable number. This effect has no penetration and requires neither words nor gestures. ''(InCo Base 3, +3 Target: Bloodline (ArM5, page 92), +1 to determine state of health)''

'''Twilight Scars:''' Aurulentus can heal the toothache of small children with but a touch, he has exceptionally strong facial hair growth, dogs sense him as a cat and act accordingly, he never suffers from a hangover, and when angry Aurulentus' voice turns into that of his wife.

'''Equipment:''' A set of tasteful clothes, and a wedding ring

<span id="encumbrance-0-spells-known"></span>
==== '''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:''' ====

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+43)

''Chirurgeon's Healing Touch'' (CrCo 20/+43)

''Gentle Touch of the Purified Body'' (CrCo 20/+43)

''Purification of the Festering Body'' (CrCo 20/+43)

''Widening the River Styx'' (CrCo 20/+31)

''Severed Limb Made Whole'' (CrCo 25/+43)

''Blissful Sensations'' (CrCo 30/+43)

''Artemis' Fertility'' (CrCo 40/+64)

''Incantation of the Body Made Whole'' (CrCo 40/+43)

''Bestow the Blessing of Apollon'' (CrCo 50/+43) ''Incantation of the Warriors Made Whole'' (CrCo 50/+43)

''Blessing of Artemis' Fertility'' (CrCo 65/+64)

''Revealed Flaws of Mortal Flesh'' (InCo 10/+34)

''Pose Clotho's Question'' (InCo 5/+34)

''Parental Inquisitiveness'' (InCo 10/+34)

''Pose Nona's Question'' (InCo 10/+34)

''The Maculate Noblewoman'' (InCo 15/+46)

''Verifying the Presence of Artemis' Blessing'' (InCo 15/+34)

''Eyes of the Sage'' (InCo(Im) 30/+24)

''Ease the Suffering of Childbirth'' (MuCo 15/+33)

''Bane of the Decrepit Body'' (PeCo 25/+32)

''Rise of the Feathery Body'' (ReCo 10/+35)

''Hold Chur'' (ReCo 30/+35)

''It's Raining Men'' (ReCo 30/+35)

''Warding the Unruly Child'' (ReCo 30/+35)

''Seven Leagues Stride'' (ReCo 30/+35)

''Seven Leagues Travel'' (ReCo 35/+35)

''Bountiful Feast'' (CrHe 35/+38)

''Lamp without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+27)

''Phantasmal Troupe'' (CrIm 15/+33)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+24)

''Summoning the Distant Image'' (InIm 25/+24)

''Aura of Ennobled Presence'' (MuIm 10/+23)

''Comeliness of the Crone'' (MuIm 10/+23)

''Disguise of the Transformed Image'' (MuIm

15/+23)

''Ears of a Grateful Father'' (PeIm 20/+21)

''Words of Unbroken Silence'' (CrMe 10/+33)

''Memory of the Distant Dream'' (CrMe 20/+33)

''Sight of the Transparent Motive'' (InMe 10/+24)

''Pose the Silent Question'' (InMe 20/+24)

''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+19)

'''Appearance:''' A tall and handsome man with brown hair, hazel-colored eyes with a slight golden shimmer in them, and delicately chiselled facial features. Aurulentus is always clean shaven and wears tight-fitting clothes, to accentuate his athletic figure.

'''Activities in the past 15 years:''' Eight years were spent learning and seven years in the lab, creating many items for his wife. The spells ''Blessing of Artemis' Fertility'', ''Incantation of the Warriors Made Whole'', ''Bestow the Blessing of Apollon'', ''Ears of a Grateful Father'',

<span id="magi-of-hermes-8"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="familiar-zeno-the-tortoise"></span>
=== ''Familiar: Zeno the Tortoise'' ===

'''Magic Might:''' 15

'''Characteristics:''' Int 0, Per –2, Pre –5, Com –6, Str –1, Sta +5, Dex +2, Qik –5

'''Size:''' –4

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' Enduring Constitution, Long-Winded, Tough, Unaging; Noncombatant, Poor Eyesight, Reclusive

'''Qualities:''' Camouflage, Hardy, Shell, Timid, Tireless

'''Personality Traits:''' Reclusive +3, Timid +2 '''Reputations:''' Aurulentus' Familiar (Covenant) 2

<span id="combat-2"></span>
==== '''Combat:''' ====

''Dodge:'' Init –5, Attack N/A, Defence: –5, Damage N/A

'''Soak:''' +12

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0/0, 0/0, –2/–2, –4, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties:''' –1 (1), –3 (2), –5 (3), Incapacitated (4), Dead (5+)

'''Abilities:''' Awareness 2 (food), Brawl 2 (dodge), High German 5 (Allemannisch), Latin 5 (Hermetic usage), Greek 4 (archaic vocabulary), Survival 5 (home terrain)

'''Bond Scores:''' Bronze +3, Silver +1, Gold +1 (CrCo Lab Total 40)

<span id="powers-3"></span>
==== '''Powers:''' ====

''Retreat of Invulnerability'', 1 point, Init –5, Ter-

ram: By withdrawing completely into his shell, Zeno becomes invulnerable to all types of non-magical damage and attacks. He could be thrown off a 60-foot cliff, tossed into a huge bonfire, or hacked at with axes; he would emerge unscathed.

''Grant Virtue (Unaging)'', 5 points, Init –5, Vim: Zeno can grant a single person the virtue Unaging for as long as he deems appropriate. Cancelling this effect takes one round of concentration and can be done without Zeno being able to sense the recipient and also without his consent. See ''Guardians of the Forests,'' page 32*.*

<span id="familiar-powers"></span>
==== '''Familiar Powers:''' ====

''Mental Communication:'' Zeno and Aurulentus are in constant mental contact, and can exchange words, images, and emotions. ''(CrMe 15: Base 4, +1 Touch, +10 levels unlimited uses/day)''

'''Vis:''' Two pawns of Creo, in shell

'''Appearance:''' A turtle of about 20 cm in length with a brownish, slightly drably colored shell. Along the back of the shell, 15 lumps are visible, which could be mistaken for spine bones.

''Housearrest of the Unruly Child, It's Raining Men'', and ''Parental Inquisitiveness'' were invented. The items ''Bachelor's Door'', ''Army of the Infant'', ''Bed of Rapid Convalescence'', ''Comb of Aphrodite'', ''Crib with a Mother's Touch'', ''Guardian of Decency'', ''Nappy without Nuisance'', ''Traveller's Comfort'', and ''Soothe the Mother's Anxiety'' were created. Two additional seasons of work are needed for the spells, so the above mentioned workload was made in 15 years and two seasons.

<span id="background-information"></span>
= ''Background Information'' =

Aurulentus' connection to his family is very different than the norm among magi. The following is information about his family history and the impact it has on his career as a magus.

<span id="aurulentus-and-his-ancestors"></span>
=== ''Aurulentus and his Ancestors'' ===

Aurulentus' great-great-great-grandfather, Askanius, visited Greece where he met and fell in love with a nymph of Artemis. She bore him his seventh son (named Alexander) and an ageing priest of the goddess revealed to him that every seventh son of his family would hold a measure of Artemis herself in his blood. Furthermore, once seven continuous generations of seventh sons were born, this seventh son in the seventh generation would be able to reshape magic. Alexander started a mission to ensure that in every generation at least seven sons were born. Aurulentus is in the fifth generation. Not surprisingly, his corporeal father took him as his apprentice early in his childhood. At the age of 13, he was told of the full extent of the prophecy and the differing views his ancestors had on how to father seven sons — something that is now also expected of him. Around the age of 18, Aurulentus found the only comfort of

his youth: Semira, the daughter of a Latin instructor. Because of this love, Aurulentus revised his understanding of the prophecy: the only woman whom he wanted to have children with was Semira. In order to have seven sons with one and the same woman, it was necessary to guarantee the health and fertility of both man and woman for a sufficiently long time, prompting his research into Creo and Corpus magics. During his career, Aurulentus invents numerous spells concerned with childbirth and healing, as well as creating a number of items and spells designed to facilitate the daily life of a mother of many children. His most impressive feat, however, will be the invention of a Longevity Ritual that preserves his fertility.

<span id="longevity-breakthrough"></span>
=== ''Longevity Breakthrough'' ===

If you use the Original Research rules from ''Houses of Hermes: True Lineages,'' page 26 these are the steps used by Aurulentus to complete his Minor Hermetic Breakthrough. He gained valuable breakthrough insights from the following research: studying the Bronze Cord of his familiar, exploring the controlled aging process of the spell ''Bane of the Decrepit Body'' (three separate inventions were needed), investigating the reasons for the infertile Longevity Rituals using the spell ''The Maculate Noblewoman'' (four different inventions were needed to perfect the spell), inspecting the Hermetic treatment of Aging Crises using the spell ''Widening the River Styx'' (again needing three starts), three times probing the fertility concepts of his own spell ''Artemis' Fertility,'' and finally experimenting with numerous Longevity Rituals of fourth magnitude. Unsuccessful research directions were the analysis of a woman's fertility using the spells ''Pose Clotho's Question'' and ''Pose Nona's Question''. Also not promising was his idea of watching an actual act of conception using the spell ''Verifying the Presence of Artemis' Blessing.'' Six seasons in total were spent on stabilizing his research.

<span id="new-spells-1"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Aurulentus has developed the following new spells.

<span id="corpus"></span>
=== ''Corpus'' ===

<span id="widening-the-river-styx"></span>
=== '''Widening the River Styx''' ===

CrCo 20, Ritual

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Resolves a minor crisis caused by aging (see '''ArM5''', page 170). The target still requires rest for the remainder of the season to recover fully.

Aurulentus successfully used this spell to probe the exact effects Hermetic magic can have during an Aging Crisis for his research.

(Base 15, +1 Touch)

<span id="blissful-sensations"></span>
==== '''Blissful Sensations''' ====

CrCo 30

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The spell removes all pain not exceeding the pain of a light wound from the target. As soon as the spell duration ends, the pain will return if the source still exists.

Aurulentus uses this spell to ease the pains of his wife. His version is specifically designed for his wife, such that she does not gain Warping from this spell (see '''ArM5''', page 168). Frequent use of this spell often leads to an addiction, as the return of all the minor pains a human tends to ignore after the effect expires is overwhelming. The spell is not powerful enough to remove the pains of childbirth, Aurulentus uses the spell ''Ease the Suffering of Childbirth'' for this measure.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="artemis-fertility"></span>
==== '''Artemis' Fertility''' ====

CrCo 40

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

Increases the fertility of the target, thus improving the chances of conception. The spell does not ''guarantee'' conception, not even during the usual fertile phases of a woman, as Hermetic magic is unable to create life. All other magi Aurulentus has talked to do not believe that this spell works, but this does not deter him.

(Base 20 (heal any debilitating effects of poison, disease, or injury preventing conception), +1 Touch, +3 Moon)

<span id="bestow-the-blessing-of-apollon"></span>
==== '''Bestow the Blessing of Apollon''' ====

CrCo 50

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Room, Ritual

All targets within the room gain a +18 bonus to Recovery rolls to recover from injuries or diseases, as long as they have been under the influence of this spell for the whole of the recovery interval. The recovery interval is counted from the time that the spell is cast or from the time the subject enters the room — whichever is later. Any previous time is ignored.

This spell was invented by Aurulentus as a proof of concept. It is no longer used, as it is too expensive in terms of vis and causes Warping. Instead, an Enchanted Item has been made with similar effects (see New Items: Bed of Rapid Convalescence).

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +4 Year, +2 Room)

<span id="incantation-of-the-warriors-made-whole"></span>
==== '''Incantation of the Warriors Made Whole''' ====

CrCo 50

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Room, Ritual

Heals all damage to all human bodies in the room at the conclusion of the ritual. The targets must have been present in the room for the entire length of the ritual to benefit from the spell. The spell can only heal wounds, not such damage as missing limbs, or diseases and damage from poisons.

This improved version of the ''Incantation of the Body Made Whole'' was commissioned by a Tremere magus who wanted to save vis while healing a large group of wounded people. To use this during (or better, after) a battle, a tent may be used instead of a room. Using Target: Room rather than Group means that this spell can heal more wounded, if one can get all of them into a single room.

(Base 35, +1 Touch, +2 Room)

<span id="blessing-of-artemis-fertility"></span>
==== '''Blessing of Artemis' Fertility''' ====

CrCo 65

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Boundary, Ritual Increases the fertility of all within the boundary, even if they were not present at the completion of the ritual. As with the spell ''Artemis' Fertility'', no other magus believes that this spell works as anything other than a giant waste of precious Creo and Corpus vis.

Aurulentus points out that at his Covenant a higher than average rate of births is apparent, but most magi believe this to be merely a fluke. Other magi theorise that the

<span id="magi-of-hermes-9"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

mundanes are influenced by the fact that the magi have many children, and thus also act in a promiscuous way. So far, no-one has been able to replicate the spell, although Aurulentus gives copies of the Lab Texts of the spell freely to anyone asking for them.

(Base 20, +1 Touch, +4 Year, +4 Boundary)

<span id="pose-clothos-question"></span>
==== '''Pose Clotho's Question''' ====

InCo 5

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Determines if the target is pregnant. The spell will fail if cast on a man. Clotho is the youngest of the three Fates.

(Base 4, +1 Touch)

<span id="parental-inquisitiveness"></span>
=== '''Parental Inquisitiveness''' ===

InCo 10

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Part

Determines the sex of an unborn child. Hermetic magic can only distinguish the unborn child as a Part of the mother from the second trimester of pregnancy onwards (see ''Ancient Magic,'' page 55), so this spell will fail if cast in the first trimester of pregnancy.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Part)

<span id="pose-nonas-question"></span>
==== '''Pose Nona's Question''' ====

InCo 10 R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

<span id="the-prophecy-a-faerie-game"></span>
=== ''The Prophecy: A Faerie Game?'' ===

What happens after (or if) the seventh son in the seventh generation is born? Maybe nothing — the priest of Artemis and the nymph both could have been faeries who started a bet to see if they could fool seven generations of magi.

Determines if the target is pregnant and how many months are left until birth, barring unforeseen circumstances. The spell will fail if cast on a man. If the target is not pregnant, the exact date of the menstrual cycle will be revealed. Nona is the Roman version of Clotho and goddess of pregnancy. She was often called upon by women in their ninth month of pregnancy to ensure a smooth birth.

(Base 5, +1 Touch)

<span id="the-maculate-noblewoman"></span>
=== '''The Maculate Noblewoman''' ===

InCo 15

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Accurately determines the underlying reason for the infertility of the target.

Aurulentus successfully used this spell to compare two groups: those infertile from natural causes and those rendered infertile by a Longevity Ritual. Exploring the fundamen-

<span id="the-family-tree"></span>
=== ''The Family Tree'' ===

Below is a short list of Aurulentus' ancestors, each generation using a different approach to sire seven sons.

'''Generation 1: Alexander.''' Alexander believes that in order to fulfill the prophesy, he may not use any magical &quot;tricks&quot; — Artemis is the patroness of women and children. He uses his natural charm to sire seven sons with different mothers.

'''Generation 2: Antipater.''' He has considerable difficulties fathering seven sons, and dies in bed with a woman just after the conception of his seventh.

'''Generation 3: Alboin.''' Alboin realizes that charm alone nearly failed his father, and starts to use passive Corpus magic to provide surveillance and protection from diseases. He argues that Artemis couldn't be against the use of passive magic, as long as the women participate voluntarily.

'''Generation 4: Altus.''' He no qualms about using Mentem and love magic to manage the, by now large, family and to father his seventh son.

'''Generation 5: Aurulentus.''' Wishing to sire all of his children with his True Love, Aurulentus believes that developing a Longevity Ritual that does not render the target infertile is the best way to fulfil the prophecy.

'''Generation 6: Arbus Tutus.''' The seventh son of Aurulentus. So far, he has only managed to sire two daughters and does not seem too keen to father more children ... indeed, he does not seem to be too keen on other women.

(Base 10, +1 Touch)

<span id="verifying-the-presence-of-artemis-blessing"></span>
=== '''Verifying the Presence of Artemis' Blessing''' ===

InCo 15

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The caster is immediately aware of a conception in the target during the spell duration. Aurulentus observed grogs with and without Longevity Rituals during intercourse with this spell to explore the differences between the two groups. His research was unsuccessful, as he was not able to witness the actual creation of life with this spell.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="ease-the-suffering-of-childbirth"></span>
==== '''Ease the Suffering of Childbirth''' ====

MuCo 15

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

Widens the pelvis of the target, making delivery of the child straightforward. See ''Art and Academe,'' page 62, for rules regarding childbirth; this spell gives a +1 bonus to childbirth rolls.

Aurulentus invented this spell after realizing that his spell ''Blissful Sensations'' had too many undesirable side effects and was not powerful enough to help his wife during childbirth.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

<span id="hold-chur"></span>
=== '''Hold Chur''' ===

ReCo 30

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Holds the target completely motionless for the duration of the spell. In addition, the spell closes the eyes of the target and keeps them firmly shut, so that he is unable to see for the duration of the spell.

Chur is a troublesome grog of the covenant. A lesser version of this spell was used to stop him when he was doing mischief. Aurulentus soon realized that a more-powerful version would have many uses: as a combat spell, as a spell to act without witnesses, and as a spell to stop nosy mundanes. It was once used on a friendly grog who came under the influ-

<span id="magi-of-hermes-10"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

ence of a mind control spell to stop him from attacking his group without harming him.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 close eyes)

<span id="house-arrest-of-the-unruly-child"></span>
==== '''House Arrest of the Unruly Child''' ====

ReCo 30

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

Creates a circle which (if the spell penetrates) no human being may pass. Aurulentus uses this spell to either keep children away from important rooms such as his lab or his bedroom, or to keep children ''inside'' a room.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Ring)

<span id="its-raining-men"></span>
=== '''It's Raining Men''' ===

ReCo 30

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Group

Instantly transports the targets five paces upwards into the air, after which they drop to the ground. This breaks up any military formation and inflicts damage as per the rules in '''ArM5''', page 181. This spell was commissioned by a Tytalus magus who commanded a cavalry group and used the spell to break up spearmen lines just before charging into them. The Group target only allows for ten men to be thrust upwards, but this is usually enough to form a small breakthrough that a cavalry charge can exploit.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +2 Group)

<span id="seven-leagues-travel"></span>
==== '''Seven Leagues Travel''' ====

ReCo 35

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Transports the target to any place within seven leagues either that the caster can see or that the caster has an Arcane Connection to. If the caster fails an Intelligence + Finesse stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9, the arrival goes slightly awry.

This is an improved version of the ''Seven-League Stride'', sometimes used by Aurulentus to travel with his wife. The spell is specifically designed for Semira, so as to not cause Warping if cast on her. After Aurulentus created Enchanted Items that allow for instant travel, this spell is only seldom used. It was once used to teleport a group into safety from a sinking ship.

(Base 30, +1 Touch)

<span id="imaginem"></span>
= ''Imaginem'' =

<span id="comeliness-of-the-crone"></span>
=== '''Comeliness of the Crone''' ===

MuIm 10

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target appears less likeable, cute, and attractive. Numerous subtle changes in appearance bring about this change, including a shriller, higher pitched voice, a more crooked posture, and a slightly more bloated and unclean face and figure. The character gets a –3 modifier on all rolls to influence, seduce, or please others.

Aurulentus used this spell on his daughters to test whether their suitors were really more interested in personality than looks as they usually proclaimed. He stopped using it after his wife found out and forbade it. He now uses the ''Bachelor's Door'' (see Enchanted Items) to test suitors of his daughters — without the knowledge of his wife.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="ears-of-a-grateful-father"></span>
==== '''Ears of a Grateful Father''' ====

PeIm 20

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Group

All voices emitted by a group of individuals will be decreased in volume to that of a normal conversation. Aurulentus invented this spell after he had to babysit ten screaming infants.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Group, +1 changing images)

<span id="phantasmal-troupe"></span>
==== '''Phantasmal Troupe''' ====

CrIm 15

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Creates illusionary music from a direction that the caster specifies. A full troupe of musicians can be simulated in this way, with a finesse roll determining the quality of the music. Aurulentus uses this spell to amuse his wife and children. It was originally invented by his parens, Altus, with the same motivation.

(Base 1, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +2 change at command, +1 intricacy)

<span id="enchanted-items"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Aurulentus has created the following enchanted items.

<span id="army-of-the-infant"></span>
=== ''Army of the Infant'' ===

This invested item is a collection of wooden army figures: horses, soldiers, generals, and siege weapons. Each has detailed markings and is fully colored. The figures can be moved at command and are capable of emitting the appropriate noises: horses neigh, soldiers yell. This set of toys was created by Aurulentus for his sons; a similar set was made for his daughters, depicting different families of animals with corresponding sounds.

<span id="movement-of-the-toys"></span>
==== '''Movement of the Toys''' ====

ReHe 20

Pen +0, unlimited uses/day

R: Per, D: Diam, T: Ind

Enchants the wooden parts of the toys such that they are capable of small, controlled movements.

(Base 3, +1 Diam, +2 Group, +10 levels unlimited uses per day)

<span id="sounds-of-the-toys"></span>
==== '''Sounds of the Toys''' ====

CrIm 20

Pen +0, unlimited uses/day

R: Per, D: Diam, T: Ind

Creates sounds appropriate for the toy. Full speech is not possible at this level of detail, so the soldiers just shout and yell rather than speak.

(Base 1, +1 Diam, +2 Group, +2 at command, +10 levels unlimited uses per day)

<span id="bachelors-door"></span>
=== ''Bachelor's Door'' ===

This invested item is a nondescript door leading to an antechamber where guests can be welcomed and attended to. Aurulentus has all of his daughters await their suitors for the first time behind this door. The thoughts of the entering person will be read to determine if he only wishes to bed any of the fe-

<span id="magi-of-hermes-11"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

males that are present in the room. Should this be the case, a second effect will be triggered that will bar the person from entering the room.

<span id="identify-the-lecherous-suitor"></span>
==== '''Identify the Lecherous Suitor''' ====

InMe 24

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Reads the emotions of any person passing through the doorway. If strong feelings of lust towards a female in the room are sensed, the second effect, ''Bar the Lecherous Suitor'' is triggered.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 level 2 uses/day, +3 levels environmental trigger)

<span id="bar-the-lecherous-suitor"></span>
==== '''Bar the Lecherous Suitor''' ====

ReCo 33

Pen +0, 1/day

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

If this effect penetrates, then no human target may pass the doorway into the antechamber.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +5 levels device maintains concentration, +3 levels triggered effect)

<span id="bed-of-rapid-convalescence"></span>
=== ''Bed of Rapid Convalescence'' ===

CrCo 34

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

A leather sick-bed engraved with Creo and Corpus runes, as well as symbols of Apollon, the Greek god of healing. Anyone resting in this bed receives a +18 bonus to his recovery rolls, as long as he remains in the bed for the whole of the recovery period. Aurulentus created this item as a lesser enchanted device.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 level 2 uses/day, +3 levels environmental trigger)

<span id="comb-of-aphrodite"></span>
=== ''Comb of Aphrodite'' ===

PeAq 15

Pen +0, unlimited uses/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This comb instantly dries any hair that

passes through its teeth. Aurulentus contrived this lesser enchanted device for his wife as a birthday present, after she complained that he should use his magic for more practical purposes.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +10 levels unlimited uses per day)

<span id="communication-of-the-lovers"></span>
=== ''Communication of the Lovers'' ===

InIm 21

Pen +0, 2/day

R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Ind

Two matching silver amulets, each being an Arcane Connection to the other. When activated, this lesser enchanted device allows one to see and hear the person holding the matching amulet. Aurulentus uses these to communicate with his wife when they are separated. Because the device has no Penetration, Aurulentus must suppress his Parma in order to for his wife to be able to see him. The remaining problem, that both sides need to activate the amulets at the same time, was solved by casting a small CrIm spell at R: Arc, to indicate to his wife that he had the time to talk to her. Due to the hazards of leaving Arcane Connections in other persons' hands and the constant scrying danger, few other magi think such devices are a good idea.

(Base 2, +4 Arc, +1 Conc, +5 levels item maintains concentration, +1 level 2 uses/day)

<span id="crib-with-a-mothers-touch"></span>
=== ''Crib with a Mother's Touch'' ===

A simple, wooden crib with a crystal centrally fixed along the headpiece. This is an invested item made by Aurulentus to give the mothers of the Covenant a bit more free time.

<span id="the-sound-of-sound-sleep"></span>
==== '''The Sound of Sound Sleep''' ====

InIm 8

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Listens to the baby in the crib. When the baby starts to scream, the second effect is triggered.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 level 2 uses/day, +3 levels environmental trigger)

<span id="nappy-without-nuisance"></span>
=== ''Nappy without Nuisance'' ===

ReHe 17

'''Rocking into Sound Sleep'''

Pen +0, 24 uses/day R: Per, D: Conc, T: Ind

Once triggered by the first effect, this effect will rock the crib slightly, hopefully resulting in a content and sleepy baby. Once the baby's crying stops, the crib stops rocking.

(Base 3, +1 Conc, +5 levels item maintains concentration, +5 levels 24 uses/day, +3 levels triggered effect)

<span id="guardian-of-decency"></span>
=== ''Guardian of Decency'' ===

A silver necklace with three small beryl stones attached to it. The invested item detects if the wearer is touched by a man and then removes any indecent emotions from him. Aurulentus created this item after he found out that a boy from a neighboring village had aggressively pursued one of his daughters.

<span id="who-touches-my-daughter"></span>
==== '''Who Touches my Daughter?''' ====

InCo 19

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Detects if the wearer is touched by a man, and then triggers the second effect.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 level 2 uses/day, +3 levels environmental trigger)

<span id="dare-not-touch-my-daughter"></span>
==== '''Dare Not Touch my Daughter!''' ====

PeMe 30

Pen +0, 3/day

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Once triggered by the first effect, this effect renders the target completely bereft of lust — he will no longer feel indecent passions towards the wearer of the necklace, or indeed, any woman.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 levels for 3 uses/day, +3 levels triggered effect)

<span id="a-guardians-voice"></span>
==== '''A Guardian's Voice''' ====

CrIm 11

Pen +0, unlimited uses/day

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Ind

Emits a quiet, but audible humming, so that the effect ''Dare Not Touch my Daughter!'' can use the Range: Voice.

(Base 1, +10 levels for unlimited uses/day)

PeCo 15

Pen +0, unlimited uses/day R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

These nappies are lesser enchanted devices embroidered with Perdo runes, making any magus think twice about using them.

They destroy any human excreta that are contained within, thus eliminating the need to wash and replace the nappies often. Aurulentus had to promise to be extra careful while preparing this item, and had to conduct extensive tests before his wife allowed him to use them on any of their children.

(Base 4 (by analogy to the PeAn 4 guideline &quot;destroy something made of animal products&quot;), +1 Touch, +10 levels unlimited uses)

<span id="reunion-of-lovers"></span>
=== ''Reunion of Lovers'' ===

ReCo 40

Pen +0, 24/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Female boots made from finest calf skin, with small, intricately decorated wings on the side. They allow the wearer to duplicate the effects of the spell ''Seven Leagues Stride'' up to 24 times per day and were created as an invested device, due to the high level requirement. These items were crafted for Semira, and so do not cause her Warping.

(Base 30, +1 Touch, +5 levels for 24 uses/ day)

<span id="soothe-the-mothers-anxiety"></span>
=== ''Soothe the Mother's Anxiety'' ===

This invested device was created by Aurulentus to calm the many mothers of the Covenant. A number of the devices have been produced over the years. It consists of a small mirror and a separate handle, one being an Arcane Connection to the other. The handle can be put into a room and listens to all noises therein. If a noise louder than a whisper is detected, it triggers the second effect: the mirror displays the image and the noises of the room in which the handle is kept. The mothers are thus able put their babies to sleep and watch them, while still being able to be occupied with other work.

InIm 14

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Room

Listens to all sounds in the room that are louder than that of a whisper.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Room, +1 level 2 uses/day, +3 levels environmental trigger)

<span id="what-disturbs-sound-sleep"></span>
=== '''What Disturbs Sound Sleep?''' ===

CrIm 28

Pen +0, unlimited uses/day

R: Touch, D: Diameter, T: Ind

Displays the images and sounds of the room scryed into by the triggering effect on the mirror.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Diam, +2 move at command, +1 intricacy, +10 levels unlimited uses/day, +3 levels triggered effect)

<span id="the-face-of-paris"></span>
=== ''The Face of Paris'' ===

PeCo 14

Pen +0, unlimited uses/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This razor, although blunt, will remove any and all body hair where it touches the skin of a human. The item has no penetration built into it, so a magus has to suppress his Magic Resistance while shaving. Aurulentus' wife had always complained that his beard growth was too strong; after a twilight experience his facial hair growth increased manyfold and Aurulentus invented this lesser enchanted device to keep it under control.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +10 levels unlimited uses)

<span id="travellers-comfort"></span>
=== ''Traveller's Comfort'' ===

ReAu(Ig) 24

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

This sturdy and nondescript travelling cloak protects the wearer from rain and keeps him comfortably warm by keeping bodily warmth inside the cloak. Aurulentus invented the cloak as an invested item after his wife caught a cold from walking in the rain to visit him.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Ig requisite, +1 level 2 uses/day, +3 levels environmental trigger)

<span id="chapter-three"></span>
=== ''Chapter Three'' ===

<span id="conscientia-of-bonisagus"></span>
= ''Conscientia of Bonisagus'' =

'''Concept:''' This &quot;lab rat&quot; develops effects to order for other magi, to gather resources for her own research project that has yet to bear fruit.

Discovered at an early age in a rural village outside Carcassone, Conscientia of Bonisagus was a Hermetic prodigy. Snatched up by a Tytalus at an early age, Conscientia was able to grasp the Hermetic Arts with an amazing speed. Complex formulas were child's play, yet even the most basic of spells fizzled at her fingertips. With her parens infuriated by her inability to reliably harness the Hermetic forces, Conscientia's studies were hard and grueling. Eventually she was spotted by a Bonisagus who saw her true potential, and Conscientia was taken back to Durenmar, where her talents could be put to better use. During her training, Conscientia would spend her minute amount of free time in the lab, exploring Hermetic theory in her own ways. She assisted her new master in many high level experiments, the last of which saw a terrible disaster that left the lab destroyed and her parens in Twilight. Although she completed her gauntlet, Conscientia has kept working in that same lab, waiting for her master to return. Conscientia spends her spare time working on requests, developing Lab Texts and casting tablets for barter with other magi for the superior equipment and supplies that she needs to continue her own work. Often, she gives her patron an overly long estimate for an item's creation, and then announces that she has &quot;finished early&quot; to help bolster her reputation as a miracle worker. Sometimes she instead uses the excess time to continue her own research into the spell her parens was developing (details of which are left to the Storyguide's discretion).

''Conscientia at Gauntlet''

'''Characteristics:''' Int +4, Per +2, Pre +1, Com +1, Str –1, Sta –2, Dex 0, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 20 (20) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0 (0) '''Confidence:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Adept Laboratory Student, Affinity with Creo, Affinity with Magic Theory, Affinity with Muto, Book Learner, Great Intelligence, Inventive Genius, Study Bonus, Skilled Parens, Privileged Upbringing, Puissant Magic Theory; Waster of Vis, Weak Spontaneous Magic; Careless Sorcerer, Difficult Spontaneous Magic, Exciting Experimentation, Poor Formulaic Magic

'''Personality Traits:''' Inquisitive +2, Clever +3, Extrovert 2

'''Reputations:''' &quot;Disaster in the Making&quot; +2, Brilliant +1

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init: +0, Attack n/a, Defense +0, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init: +0, Attack +0, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Kick:'' Init: –1, Attack +0, Defense –1, Damage +2

'''Soak:''' –2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties:''' –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20)

<span id="new-flaw-exciting-experimentation"></span>
=== ''New Flaw: Exciting Experimentation'' ===

''Minor, Hermetic''

Your character's experiments tend to have a flair for the … dramatic. When rolling on the experiment table, roll two dice instead of the normal one. The Storyguide then chooses and applies the more amusing of your two results.

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 1 (correcting mistakes), Awareness 2 (finding flaws), Bargain 1 (vis), Charm 2 (begging for favors), Code of Hermes 1 (nitpicking details), Etiquette 1 (apologies), Finesse 1 (getting it right the first time), Folk Ken 2 (magi), French 5 (explanations), Guile 1 (breaking bad news), Latin 4 (writing), Magic Lore 1 (famous mistakes), Magic Theory 5+2 (enchanting items), Parma Magica 1 (lab explosions)

'''Arts: Cr''' 10, '''In''' 0, '''Mu''' 10, '''Pe''' 5, '''Re''' 5, '''An''' 5, '''Aq''' 2, '''Au''' 5, '''Co''' 0, '''He''' 1, '''Ig''' 1, '''Im''' 1, '''Me''' 0, '''Te''' 10, '''Vi''' 5

'''Equipment:''' Ink-stained robes, more vis than anyone thinks she needs, and the finest lab equipment she could barter for.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Epona's Bane'' (ReAn 25/+3)

''Be Rid the Tell Tale Smoke'' (PeAu 20/+3)

''Statim Sessio'' (CrHe 10/+4)

''Evening's Comfort'' (CrIg 5/+4)

''Palm of Odorous Flame'' (CrIg 5/+4)

''Veneficus Enigma'' (CrIm 20/+4)

''Spy the Approaching Grog'' (InIm 5/–6)

''Circle of Undisturbed Rest'' (ReIm 5/–1)

''Conjure the Ocean's Breath'' (MuTe 15/+13)

''Armatura Vitreus'' (MuTe 20/+13)

''Saving the Apprentice's Time'' (PeTe 10/+8)

''Foras Vim'' (ReTe 15/+8)

'''Appearance:''' Conscientia is a scruffy girl of small stature, often found in robes stained with innumerable unidentifiable substances. She keeps herself in a practical state, often with hair tied back and the sleeves of her robes pulled up. Conscientia's left cheek bears an unsightly blue stain, a relic of experiments past.

'''Sigil:''' When Conscientia casts her spells, lines around the target appear twisted and broken. Her voting sigil is five curved lines forming a pentagram.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-12"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="conscientia-15-years"></span>
=== ''Conscientia +15 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +4, Per +2, Pre +1, Com +1, Str –1, Sta –2, Dex 0, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 35 (35)

'''Decrepitude:''' 0

'''Warping Score:''' 3 (0)

'''Confidence:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Adept Laboratory Student, Affinity with Creo, Affinity with Magic Theory, Affinity with Muto, Book Learner, Great Intelligence, Inventive Genius, Study Bonus, Skilled Parens, Privileged Upbringing, Puissant Magic Theory; Waster of Vis, Weak Spontaneous Magic; Careless Sorcerer, Difficult Spontaneous Magic, Exciting Experimentation, Poor Formulaic Magic

'''Personality Traits:''' Inquisitive +2, Clever +3, Extrovert –2, Loyal (Familiar) +3

'''Reputations:''' &quot;Disaster in the Making&quot; +3, Brilliant +2

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init: +0, Attack n/a, Defense +0, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init: +0, Attack +0, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Kick:'' Init: –1, Attack +0, Defense –1, Damage +2

'''Soak:''' –2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties:''' –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 1 (correcting mistakes), Awareness 2 (finding flaws), Bargain 3 (vis), Charm 2 (begging for favors), Code of Hermes 1 (nitpicking details), Etiquette 1 (apologies), Finesse 1 (getting it right the first time), French 5 (explanations), Folk Ken 2 (magi), Guile 1 (breaking bad news), Latin 4 (writing), Magic Lore 1 (famous mistakes), Magic Theory 8+2 (enchanting items), Parma Magica 1 (lab explosions), Penetration 1 (Mentem)

'''Arts: Cr''' 15, '''In''' 1, '''Mu''' 15, '''Pe''' 5, '''Re''' 10, '''An''' 10, '''Aq''' 10, '''Au''' 5, '''Co''' 10, '''He''' 3, '''Ig''' 1, '''Im''' 1, '''Me''' 1, '''Te''' 10, '''Vi''' 5

'''Twilight Scars:''' Light sources cast shadows of people who are not currently in the room.

'''Spells Known:''' ''Doublet of Silk, That's Impenetrable'' (MuAn

15/+18)

''Pests of a Colossal Size'' (MuAn 35/+18) ''Epona's Bane'' (ReAn 25/+13)

''Be Rid the Tell Tale Smoke'' (PeAu 20/+3)

''Statim Sessio'' (CrHe 10/+11)

''Fell the Mighty Trunk'' (MuHe 15/+11)

''Evening's Comfort'' (CrIg 5/+9)

''Palm of Odorous Flame'' (CrIg 5/+9)

''Veneficus Enigma'' (CrIm 20/+9)

''Spy the Approaching Grog''(InIm 5/–5)

''Circle of Undisturbed Rest'' (ReIm 5/+4)

''Conjure the Ocean's Breath'' (MuTe 15/+18)

''Armatura Vitreus'' (MuTe 20/+18)

''Saving the Apprentice's Time'' (PeTe 10/+8)

''Foras Vim'' (ReTe 15/+13)

'''Activities in the last 15 Years''': Conscientia has taken a position at Durenmar as a librarian in the Great Library. She has spent seven seasons inventing spells and items, one season binding her familiar, and one season developing a longevity ritual with a score of 10.

<span id="conscientia-30-years"></span>
=== ''Conscientia +30 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +4, Per +2, Pre +1, Com +1, Str –1, Sta –2, Dex 0, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 50 (38)

'''Decrepitude:''' 0

'''Warping Score:''' 4 (24)

'''Confidence:''' 2 (6)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Adept Laboratory Student, Affinity with Creo, Affinity with Magic Theory, Affinity with Muto, Book Learner, Great Intelligence, Inventive Genius, Study Bonus, Skilled Parens, Privileged Upbringing, Puissant Magic Theory; Waster of Vis, Weak Spontaneous Magic; Careless Sorcerer, Difficult Spontaneous Magic, Exciting Experimentation, Poor Formulaic Magic

'''Personality Traits:''' Inquisitive +2, Clever +3, Extrovert –2, Loyal (Familiar) +3, Wary of Blue Potions +1

'''Reputations:''' Disaster +3, Brilliant +2

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init: +0, Attack n/a, Defense +0, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init: +0, Attack +0, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Kick:'' Init: –1, Attack +0, Defense –1, Damage +2

'''Soak:''' –2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties:''' –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 1 (correcting mistakes), Awareness 2 (finding flaws), Bargain 3 (vis), Charm 2 (begging for

favors), Code of Hermes 1 (nitpicking details), Etiquette 1 (apologies), Finesse 1 (getting it right the first time), French 5 (explanations), Folk Ken 2 (magi), Greek 1 (''caecus''), Guile 1 (breaking bad news), Latin 4 (writing), Magic Lore 1 (famous mistakes), Magic Theory 10+2 (enchanting items), Parma Magica 1 (lab explosions), Penetration 1 (Mentem)

'''Arts: Cr''' 20, '''In''' 1, '''Mu''' 20, '''Pe''' 10, '''Re''' 10, '''An''' 10, '''Aq''' 10, '''Au''' 5, '''Co''' 10, '''He''' 5, '''Ig''' 5, '''Im''' 5, '''Me''' 5, '''Te''' 10, '''Vi''' 10

'''Twilight Scars:''' Light sources cast shadows of people who are not currently in the room, and her reflection is ever so slightly translucent.

<span id="spells-known"></span>
==== '''Spells Known:''' ====

''Doublet of Silk, That's Impenetrable'' (MuAn 15/+23)

''Pests of a Colossal Size'' (MuAn 35/+23)

''Epona's Bane'' (ReAn 25/+13)

''Summon the Eldritch Bond'' (ReAn 35/+13)

''Be Rid the Tell Tale Smoke'' (PeAu 20/+13)

''Touch of the Blessed Virgin'' (CrCo 20/+13)

''Statim Sessio'' (CrHe 10/+18)

''Fell the Mighty Trunk'' (MuHe 15/+18)

''Evening's Comfort'' (CrIg 5/+18)

''Palm of Odorous Flame'' (CrIg 5/+18)

''Veneficus Enigma'' (CrIm 20/+18)

''Spy the Approaching Grog''(InIm 5/–1)

''Circle of Undisturbed Rest'' (ReIm 5/+8)

''Robbed in Angelic Beauty'' (CrMe 25/+23)

''Apollo's Fearful Gaze'' (MuMe 30/+18)

''Conjure the Ocean's Breath'' (MuTe 15/+23) ''Armatura Vitreus'' (MuTe 20/+23)

''Saving the Apprentice's Time'' (PeTe 10/+13)

''Foras Vim'' (ReTe 15/+18)

''Carve Domaine'' (ReTe 20/+13)

'''Activities in the last 15 Years''': Since settling in at her job, Conscientia has spent a lot of time working on her own personal projects. She has spent 16 seasons inventing new spells and items, and one season reinventing her longevity ritual.

<span id="conscientia-45-years"></span>
=== ''Conscientia +45 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +4, Per +2, Pre +1, Com +1, Str –1, Sta –2, Dex 0, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 65 (41) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 6 (13) '''Confidence:''' 2 (6)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Adept Laboratory Student, Affinity with Creo, Affinity with Magic Theory, Affinity with Muto, Book Learner, Great

<span id="familiar-aureus-the-exotic-bird"></span>
=== ''Familiar: Aureus the Exotic Bird'' ===

'''Magic Might:''' 20 (Ig)

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per +1, Pre +1, Com 0, Str –6, Sta 0, Dex +1, Qik +5

'''Size:''' –3

'''Soak:''' 0

'''Cord Scores:''' Gold +2, Silver +0, Bronze +2

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 1 (reading), Athletics 6 (flying), Bargain 3 (getting fed, again), Folk Ken 3 (Conscientia), French 5 (explanations), Latin 4 (reading), Magic Theory 3 (reading)

'''Personality Traits:''' Loyal +3, Patient +2, Inquisitive +1, Terrified of Blue Potions +1

'''Powers:'''

''Reincarnation'': 15 points, Animal. If Aureus dies with 15 or more temporary Might, his body bursts into flames. Within one hour, a new body rises from the ashes, with 1 temporary Might point.

'''Bond Empowerments:'''

''Speech'' ('''ArM5''', page 105)

''Shared Senses'' ('''ArM5''', page 105)

'''Appearance:''' Aureus is a beautiful and exotic bird, gifted to Conscientia from a particularly grateful patron. He has a fiery red hue with a long, feathery golden ruff, and exquisite wingtips of yellows, golds, and oranges.

Intelligence, Inventive Genius, Study Bonus, Skilled Parens, Privileged Upbringing, Puissant Magic Theory; Waster of Vis, Weak Spontaneous Magic; Careless Sorcerer, Difficult Spontaneous Magic, Exciting Experimentation, Poor Formulaic Magic

'''Personality Traits:''' Inquisitive +2, Clever +3, Extrovert –2, Loyal (Familiar) +3, Wary of Blue Potions +1

'''Reputations:''' Disaster +3, Brilliant +2 '''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init: +0, Attack n/a, Defense +0, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init: +0, Attack +0, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Kick:'' Init: –1, Attack +0, Defense –1, Damage +2

'''Soak:''' –2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties:''' –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 3 (correcting mistakes), Awareness 3 (finding flaws), Bargain 4 (vis), Charm 3 (begging for favors), Code of Hermes 2 (nitpicking details), Etiquette 2 (apologies), Finesse 2 (getting it right the first time), French 5 (explanations), Folk Ken 3 (magi), Greek 1 (''caecus''), Guile 2 (breaking bad news), Latin 4 (writing), Magic Lore 2 (famous mistakes), Magic Theory 10+2 (enchanting items), Parma Magica 2 (lab explosions), Penetration 1 (Mentem)

'''Arts: Cr''' 20, '''In''' 10, '''Mu''' 20, '''Pe''' 10, '''Re''' 15, '''An''' 10, '''Aq''' 10, '''Au''' 10, '''Co''' 10, '''He''' 5, '''Ig''' 5, '''Im''' 5, '''Me''' 10, '''Te''' 10, '''Vi''' 10

'''Twilight Scars:''' Light sources cast shadows

of people who are not currently in the room, and her reflection is ever so slightly translucent.

'''Spells Known:'''

''Doublet of Silk, That's Impenetrable'' (MuAn 15/+23)

''Pests of a Colossal Size'' (MuAn 35/+23)

''Epona's Bane'' (ReAn 25/+18)

''Summon the Eldritch Bond'' (ReAn 35/+18)

''Conjure From the Mist'' (MuAu(Te) 40/+23)

''Be Rid the Tell Tale Smoke'' (PeAu 20/+13)

''Touch of the Blessed Virgin'' (CrCo 20/+23)

''Statim Sessio'' (CrHe 10/+18)

''Fell the Mighty Trunk'' (MuHe 15/+18)

''Evening's Comfort'' (CrIg 5/+18)

''Palm of Odorous Flame'' (CrIg 5/+18)

''Veneficus Enigma'' (CrIm 20/+18)

''Spy the Approaching Grog''(InIm 5/+8)

''Circle of Undisturbed Rest'' (ReIm 5/+13)

''Robbed in Angelic Beauty'' (CrMe 30/+18)

''Thoughts Within Speech'' (InMe 30/+13)

''Apollo's Fearful Gaze'' (MuMe 20/+23)

''Slave of Charity'' (ReMe 35/+23)

''Conjure the Ocean's Breath'' (MuTe 15/+23)

''Armatura Vitreus'' (MuTe 20/+23) ''Foras Vim'' (ReTe 15/+18)

''Carve Domaine'' (ReTe 20/+13)

''Saving the Apprentice's Time'' (PeTe 10/+13)

'''Activities in the last 15 Years''': As Conscientia approaches her later years, she has taken more time out to get to know her fellow magi better and to interact with her peers. However, she does still find time to complete her own projects. She has spent 12 seasons inventing new spells and items.

<span id="new-spells-2"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Conscientia has developed these spells.

<span id="animal-spells-1"></span>
=== ''Animal Spells'' ===

<span id="doublet-of-silk-thats-impenetrable"></span>
== '''Doublet of Silk, That's Impenetrable''' ==

As ''Doublet of Impenetrable Silk'', but experimentation has resulted in a minor side effect. The clothing affected is changed into actual silk, as well as gaining the normal benefits of the spell.

<span id="pests-of-a-colossal-size"></span>
==== '''Pests of a Colossal Size''' ====

MuAn 30

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group

While experimenting with ''Beast of Outlandish Size'', an unforeseen side effect gave birth to this unusual, but peculiarly effective, spell. ''Pests of a Colossal Size'' causes the ordinary pests on the target (such as lice, fleas, ticks, etc.) to grow to an enormous size. Being covered in enormous and often hostile insects is disconcerting to say the least, as the pests themselves tend to revert to their basic fight or flight instincts.

(Base 4, +2 Sun. +2 Group, +2 Voice)

<span id="eponas-bane"></span>
==== '''Epona's Bane''' ====

ReAn 25

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Group

Created as a defense against the eastern horseman, ''Epona's Bane'' startles and panics up to a small unit of cavalry horses. The riders of these horses must roll Strength + Ride against an Ease Factor of 12, or be thrown to the ground and risk being trampled. Even those who manage to keep themselves on their mounts must bring their horses back under control before continuing forward.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +2 Group)

<span id="summon-the-eldritch-bond"></span>
==== '''Summon the Eldritch Bond''' ====

ReAn 35

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind.

A fine preparation to a Wizard's War, this spell commands a biting insect, such as a mosquito or flea, to bite a specific target and then

(Base 15, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

<span id="auram-spells-1"></span>
=== ''Auram Spells'' ===

<span id="conjure-from-the-mist"></span>
=== '''Conjure From the Mist''' ===

MuAu(Te) 40

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Part

Developed as an all-purpose utility spell, ''Conjure From the Mist'' turns a large section of air into stone, in the shape of the user's choice. More-complicated shapes require Finesse rolls as normal, but items such as stairs, bridges, walls, spikes and other obstacles are possible.

(Base 4, +2 Sun, +1 Part, +2 Voice, +2 size, +1 Intricate)

<span id="be-rid-the-tell-tale-smoke"></span>
==== '''Be Rid the Tell Tale Smoke''' ====

PeAu 20

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

Conscientia learned this spell from her parens, who developed it after overhearing grogs complaining about a how a campfire's smoke always gives away their position. This spell simply destroys all smoke within the circle. Great for setting up camp on the sly, or keeping the laboratory smoke-free.

(Base 5, +2 Ring, +1 Touch)

<span id="corpus-spells-1"></span>
=== ''Corpus Spells'' ===

<span id="touch-of-the-blessed-virgin"></span>
==== '''Touch of the Blessed Virgin''' ====

CrCo 20

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

Conscientia swears this was developed for a friend, and she has never personally found a use for this spell. Popular with fathers, princesses, and nuns alike, this spell restores a woman's maidenhood and virtue. This is often combined with an ''Elixir of Morning's Afterthought'' for full effect.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, Ritual)

<span id="charged-items-and-potions"></span>
=== ''Charged Items and Potions'' ===

Often overlooked in Hermetic workings, charged items can be an essential part of a magus' repertoire. Charged items are unique in their ability to produce large effects where normal enchanted items or spontaneous magic prove too difficult or time consuming to make, and without the cost in vis. Larger effects are far easier to enchant into charged items, so they are a perfect solution if more than a few uses aren't necessary. They also have the benefit of being produced in large quantities so that they may be given out to multiple individuals. A variety of effects, both small and large in magnitude, can be handed out, enabling those who posses them to deal with situations they might normally be ill-equipped to deal with.

Potions are a popular choice for charged items, as they are easily carried and inconspicuous, as well as easily used as a thrown weapon. Carrying the potions around in containers also helps keep down accidental discharges of Touch Range effects. Musical items such as bells and flutes are also popular, as they make excellent choices for effects that need to use Voice Range.

Some popular charged items are:

<span id="pneum-flask"></span>
==== '''Pneum Flask''' ====

ReAu 5

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Uncork this small bottle and you can steal the breath of an individual. The breath flows into the flask, which should be immediately corked. If the magus acts fast enough, the stolen breath can then be fixed as an Arcane Connection to the target.

(Base 2, +3 sight)

<span id="elixir-of-mornings-afterthought"></span>
==== '''Elixir of Morning's Afterthought''' ====

CrCo 20

R: Touch , D: Mom, T: Ind,

A quick draught of this elixir will wash away even the most serious hangovers. Popular among Jerbiton and Redcaps alike. (Base 15, +1 Touch)

<span id="magic-spice"></span>
==== '''Magic Spice''' ====

MuIm 5

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Useful while traveling, or in delicate social situations, as a magus can simply pour a bit on even the most appalling food, and taste a delicious feast of his own devising. Adding a bit to the gruel in the soldiers' mess can make for a significant improvement in the men's morale.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="ink-of-the-unseen-circle"></span>
==== '''Ink of the Unseen Circle''' ====

PeIm 15

R: Per, D: Moon, T: Ind

After listening to hordes of magi boasting about their latest &quot;ingenious magical traps,&quot; Conscientia realized they all shared the same common flaw … What idiot is going to willingly step into the creepy magic circle? This specialized ink was the answer. Once activated, the ink becomes invisible for the duration of the effect. When used to draw a Hermetic circle for Ring spells, this ink destroys the iconic species of the ring after activation, leaving it an invisible Hermetic landmine.

(Base 4, +3 Moon)

<span id="potion-of-vulcans-appeasement"></span>
==== '''Potion of Vulcan's Appeasement''' ====

PeIg 20

R: Touch , D: Mom, T: Ind

When exposed to open flame, this potion extinguishes a fire up to the size of a large house. Very useful for saving the covenant library from a fiery demise, leaving you valuable time to concoct a proper excuse.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +3 Size)

<span id="message-in-a-bottle"></span>
==== '''Message in a Bottle''' ====

CrMe 5

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Easily carried and completely inconspicuous, a Message in a Bottle is one of the most secure ways to deliver a clandestine message. When this potion is consumed, the drinker has a message of the creator's design flash through his mind. Very few people would even think to check a vial of liquid for a message, and fewer would be foolish enough to drink an unknown potion just to discover what the suspected message might be.

(Base 4, +1 Touch)

<span id="the-wakeful-nightmare"></span>
=== '''The Wakeful Nightmare''' ===

ReMe 20

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

This terrible liquid, if consumed, forbids the body from entering slumber, denying the unfortunate victim his daily rejuvenation. The target stays awake until the duration of the effect ends. Fatigue levels may not be restored, and slowly the sleep deprivation will start to drive the target insane. After every three successive days without rest, the target loses an additional Fatigue level from exhaustion. Once all the target's Fatigue is lost, she starts taking physical wounds as her body shuts down. Each time the character loses another Fatigue level, she takes 5 + stress die in damage. These wounds cannot heal naturally until the character fully rests.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +3 Moon)

<span id="whistle-of-warning"></span>
=== '''Whistle of Warning''' ===

ReMe 35

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Group

A particularly spiteful magus, with just a blow from this whistle, will inflict a group with ''Visions of the Infernal Terrors'' until the magus decides to release them from their torment.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +2 Group)

<span id="door-in-a-bottle"></span>
==== '''Door in a Bottle''' ====

PeTe 5

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Splashed onto a wall, ''Door in a Bottle'' dissolves away the stone into an instant exit. Using this potion for illegal purposes is, of course, highly discouraged.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Stone)

<span id="disenchanting-concoction"></span>
==== '''Disenchanting Concoction''' ====

PeVi 40

Pen: +30

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This useful potion acts as ''Winds of Mundane Silence''. One of the most utilitarian items a magus can carry with him, it can be used in a variety of ways; it can remove a curse, disenchant a magical trap, or even be thrown on another to drop her Parma.

(+1 Touch, +15 Penetration)

<span id="herbam-spells-1"></span>
=== ''Herbam Spells'' ===

<span id="statim-sessio"></span>
=== '''Statim Sessio''' ===

CrHe 10

R: Touch, D: Sun, T:Ind

Favored by magi young and old who just need a quick rest, this spell creates a comfortable wooden chair.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="ignem-spells-1"></span>
=== ''Ignem Spells'' ===

<span id="evenings-comfort"></span>
==== '''Evening's Comfort''' ====

CrIg 5

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Per

After many sleepless nights spent chilled to the bone, enough was enough. Slipping down to the lab to work at night, Conscentia developed this simple spell to keep her warm at night. This spell simply keeps your bed toasty warm until sunrise.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="palm-of-odorous-flame"></span>
=== '''Palm of Odorous Flame''' ===

The first spell Conscentia developed on her own, this spell works as ''Palm of Flame'', but experimentation has produced a small side effect. Each time the spell is cast, the flame produces the smell of a random odor. Oddly enough, the most common scent produced is elderberry. Needless to say, this spell has proven difficult to trade.

<span id="imaginem-spells-1"></span>
=== ''Imaginem Spells'' ===

<span id="veneficus-enigma"></span>
==== '''Veneficus Enigma''' ====

CrIm 20

R: Touch, D:Conc, T: Ind

Developed as a quick game for magi, the ''Veneficus Enigma'' creates the illusion of a small puzzlebox in the palm of the caster's hand that can be manipulated by another. When cast, the caster sets the puzzle for the ''Veneficus Enigma.'' The illusory box then produces lights and sounds that are clues on how to open it. Figuring out the puzzle requires an Intelligence + Artes Liberales roll versus an Ease Factor equal to the casters Intelligence + Artes Liberales + 5. Traditionally, the caster holds an item in

<span id="magi-of-hermes-13"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

the palm of his hand when he casts this spell, to be retrieved as the &quot;prize&quot; when the box is opened. Removing the box from the caster's hands to reveal the item without solving the puzzle is considered extremely impolite.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Move/ Noise, +1 Intricate)

<span id="spy-the-approaching-grog"></span>
=== '''Spy the Approaching Grog''' ===

InIm 5

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Room

A touch of a wall allows the caster to peer around the corner without entering the room. Great for sneaking down to the lab or the kitchen without being caught. This spell is designed to be cast forcelessly, as to not accidentally scry on another magus.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +1 Con, +2 Room)

<span id="circle-of-undisturbed-rest"></span>
==== '''Circle of Undisturbed Rest''' ====

ReIm 5

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

Created in conjunction with ''Be Rid the Tell Tale Smoke'', this large circle spell is meant to be used around an encampment. The circle prevents iconic and echoic species from leaving the circle, making the encampment undetectable. Perfect for ensuring privacy in unfamiliar territories, it does leave the camp as a silent black area; this is normally enough at night, when everything is dark, and Conscientia does not see the need for additional illusions.

(Base 1, +2 Ring, +1 Touch, +1 additional sense)

<span id="mentem-spells-1"></span>
=== ''Mentem Spells'' ===

<span id="robed-in-angelic-beauty"></span>
==== '''Robed in Angelic Beauty''' ====

CrMe(Im) 25

R: Voice, D: Con, T: Group

This spell creates the image of perfect beauty and a holy aura, instilling a feeling of being near a divine source. This comes in handy when you need the local plebs to believe … well, anything. Conspicuous effects are also more likely to be accepted when the populous thinks of them as miracles rather than spells. However, caution is advised so as not to attract too much attention from the church, or indeed, from demons.

Note that all Mythic Europeans know that the devil can masquerade as an angel of light; if a Gifted individual serves as the spokesperson during the effect of this spell, that is almost certainly what the audience will believe.

(Base 4, +1 Voice, +1 Con, +2 Group, +1 Imaginem Req.)

<span id="thoughts-within-speech"></span>
=== '''Thoughts Within Speech''' ===

InMe 30

R: Eye, D: Mom, T: Ind

Yet another spell where its creation resulted in a side effect worth keeping, this spell acts like ''Peering Into the Mortal Mind'', but while the magus is searching through the thoughts of the target, the target unknowingly speaks those thoughts aloud, going so far as to even weave them into an ongoing conversation. For example: &quot;Did you hear about the new sheriff? ''Why yes, I was in the gardens last night.'' I hear he is going to raise taxes this year.&quot;

(Base 25, +1 Eye)

<span id="apollos-fearful-gaze"></span>
=== '''Apollo's Fearful Gaze''' ===

MuMe 30

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

This horrific spell rewrites the target's common sense, so that light induces pain signals (''Art and Academe,'' page 33). The brighter the light, the stronger the pain sensed. Note that the pain isn't caused by any wounds, and will disappear as soon as the spell ends, or when the target is no longer exposed to light.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Light Source P
! enalty
|-
| Moonlight or
|
|-
| Candlelight
| –1
|-
| Torchlight
| –3
|-
| Bonfire
| –5
|-
| Daylight
| Incapacitated
|}

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

<span id="slave-of-charity"></span>
==== '''Slave of Charity''' ====

ReMe 35

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

This spell acts as ''Enslave the Mortal'' mind, with one exception. The target remains open to all commands as long as the spell remains active. Any time the target hears a new suggestion, he stops what he's doing and follows the new command, returning to his previous commands when the most recent task is complete. Needless to say this side effect proved quite awkward when discovered.

(Base 20, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

<span id="terram-spells-1"></span>
= ''Terram Spells'' =

<span id="conjure-the-oceans-breath"></span>
=== '''Conjure the Ocean's Breath''' ===

MuTe 15

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Part

Developed for the traveling magus who needs a quick, easily tradable resource. ''Conjure the Ocean's Breath'' turns a large patch of dirt into salt. It is best that the magus not be around when the spell's duration expires.

(Base 2, + 3 Moon, + 1 Part, +1 Touch)

<span id="armatura-vitrea"></span>
=== '''Armatura Vitrea''' ===

MuTe 20

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Ind

Designed for those who fear the threat of armor-wearing assailants, ''Armatura Vitrea'' transforms one attacker's armor into glass. The armor now provides a protection of 2, and a load of 3. If struck with a weapon, the glass armor shatters sending razor-sharp shards everywhere, adding an additional simple die to the attack's damage. This, of course, destroys the armor.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +2 Diam, +2 metal)

<span id="foras-vim"></span>
==== '''Foras Vim''' ====

ReTe 15

R: Voice, D Mom, T: Group

An easily fast-cast defense against other magi, this spell shoots a choking cloud of dust and gravel at its targets. Those within the cloud are blinded by the dust and grit, and find it difficult to breathe. Casting a spell while in the cloud requires a Stamina + Concentration roll against an Ease Factor of 12. This spell also has uses in detecting invisible opponents. Conscientia has been meaning to get around to mastering this spell so that she ''can'' fast cast it ever since she created it. Maybe next season ...

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Group)

<span id="carve-domain"></span>
==== '''Carve Domain''' ====

PeTe 20

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Part

''Carve Domain'' destroys a channel of up to 10,000 cubic feet of earth. This can be used, among other things, as a defensive emplacement, to channel a river, to expand irrigation, or to develop a makeshift moat. A Finesse roll is required for more-complex designs.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Part, +3 Size)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-14"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="saving-the-apprentices-time"></span>
=== '''Saving the Apprentice's Time''' ===

PeTe 10

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Room

Realizing she could squeeze in a few more precious moments of lab time, Conscentia decided to &quot;cheat&quot; in her chores. With just a wave of the hand, she can have an hour's worth of dusting completed in a minute.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, + 2 Room)

<span id="new-guideline-crte-15"></span>
=== ''New Guideline: CrTe 15'' ===

Repair a crafted item, returning it to an &quot;as new&quot; state.

<span id="enchanted-items-1"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Conscientia has created these items.

<span id="apollos-lyre"></span>
=== ''Apollo's Lyre'' ===

Apollo's Lyre was originally made to appease Conscientia's discontented grogs, who kept complaining about the insufferable living conditions in the forgotten depths of a subterranean lab. A small brass lyre, decorated with strips of engraved cinnamon wood, Apollo's Lyre can play a number of different melodies, songs, or compositions at the caster's whim. Each string on the lyre, when plucked, plays a different tune. This Lab Text quickly became a popular trade item in Conscientia's stock.

<span id="phantasmal-minstrels"></span>
==== '''Phantasmal Minstrels''' ====

CrIm 10

Pen 0, 3/Day

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Ind

''Phantasmal Minstrels'' produces a specific song or melody when activated. The song plays until the magus plucks the same string again, or another string to start a new song. This effect is enchanted multiple times into the lyre, once for each song the magus wishes to hear. Each song is triggered by plucking a different string.

Conscientia's effect requires a single pawn of vis to invest, allowing a greater variety of songs in a single lyre (eight for a wooden lyre, which counts as a large wooden object.)

(Base 1, +1 Conc, +1 tune, +2 3/day, +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="cooking-stone"></span>
=== ''Cooking Stone'' ===

This is a small piece of stone with a brass inlay in the shape of a hearth. When it's placed into a pot of water, the water boils instantly. When the cook is finished, all he needs to do is empty the pot, and retrieve the stone. This item deviates from the Hermetic tradition of overly complex and symbolic names, but occasionally pragmatism has its place.

<span id="boil-water"></span>
=== '''Boil Water''' ===

CrIg 15 R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind Pen +0, Unlimited/Day This effect boils water on contact. (Base 4, +1 Touch, +10 unlimited uses)

<span id="cultellus"></span>
=== ''Cultellus'' ===

This small knife with a basalt handle was developed as a trade for some very nice lab equipment. The patron wished a small kitchen knife enchanted with the ability to dispel Parma. Conscientia was halfway through the project before she realized the consequences of what she was making. When confronted, the patron never returned to claim his payment. Conscientia has always claimed to have never finished the project, and to have destroyed what notes she had.

<span id="perdo-parma"></span>
==== '''Perdo Parma''' ====

PeVi 37

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Pen +32, 50/Day

When this knife contacts a magus, it will dispel any Parma Magica with a score of 6 or lower (thus providing a Magic Resistance of 30 or lower), as long as it Penetrates. This version relies on the targeted magus being somewhat weak in Vim if his Parma is strong.

(Base 10, + 1 Touch, +6 50/day, +16 32 Penetration)

<span id="dico-calculus"></span>
=== ''Dico Calculus'' ===

This small stone was created for a blind Criamon who needed an aid in reading. When drawn over a page, the stone &quot;sees&quot; the words on the page and transmits the images into the user's mind.

<span id="impart-the-words"></span>
==== '''Impart the Words''' ====

CrMe 26 R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind Pen +0, Unlimited/Day

Transmits the images sensed by the object to the user's mind.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +5 item maintains concentration, +10 unlimited uses, +3 linked trigger)

<span id="read-the-words"></span>
==== '''Read the Words''' ====

InIm 18 R: Touch, D: Con, T: Ind Pen +0, Unlimited/Day

When activated, the object senses the iconic species of whatever it's touching.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +5 item maintains concentration, +10 unlimited uses)

<span id="ferramenta-glacies"></span>
=== ''Ferramenta Glacies'' ===

This inconspicuous item looks like a normal pick, but with a small crystal embedded in the handle. When touched to water, it freezes a block of ice that can be used for trade, storage, or consumption.

<span id="touch-of-ymir"></span>
==== '''Touch of Ymir''' ====

ReAq 14 R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind Pen +0, Unlimited/Day Instantly freezes surrounding water into ice. Further applications keep the ice frozen. (Base 3, +1 Touch, +10 unlimited uses)

<span id="hermes-horn"></span>
=== ''Hermes' Horn'' ===

This is an intricately carved ram's horn with a tiny emerald charm embedded in it, that when blown will cause an entire flock to become passive and easy to control. A user can control a large herd, single-handedly driving them to and from pasture.

<span id="herd-the-passive-beasts"></span>
==== '''Herd the Passive Beasts''' ====

ReAn 40 R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group Pen +0, 1/Day

This effect calms a herd of animals (up to 1,000 animals), making them far easier to tend, allowing a shepherd or farmer to manage a much larger herd than he could without magical assistance.

(Base 4, +2 Sun, +2 Group, +2 Voice, +2 size)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-15"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="mjolnirs-equal"></span>
=== ''Mjolnir's Equal'' ===

When the wielder yells a warrior's call, this hammer can shatter the strongest shield and sunder even steel, crushing weapons, armor, and the poor soul who owns them. No object of metal or wood can withstand the blow of this hammer. This weapon can't destroy leather armors, but leather armors do little to stop the blow from even a mundane warhammer.

<span id="sunder-warrior"></span>
==== '''Sunder Warrior''' ====

PeTe(He) 25 R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind Pen +0, Unlimited/Day

Upon activation, a metal or wooden item touching the hammer is utterly destroyed.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Metal, +1 Herbam Req, +10 unlimited uses)

<span id="shulpeas-bowl"></span>
=== ''Shulpea's Bowl'' ===

This small wooden bowl is constantly filled with a non-nutritious food such as flatbread or pretzels. The food is not nourishing, but it helps the determined magus through those long lab sessions and experiments that just can't be stopped for dinner. This food is also perfect for lab conditions, as it won't stain, isn't greasy, any crumbs vanish after a few minutes, and it won't get all over the magus' fragile books or equipment.

<span id="feed-the-hungry"></span>
==== '''Feed the Hungry''' ====

CrHe 28 R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Group Pen +3, Unlimited/Day

Every two minutes, this bowl fills itself with a specific food (determined when the item is enchanted). When the duration ends, any remaining pieces of food disappear and the bowl refills.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Diam, +2 Group, +1 Size, + 10 unlimited uses, +3 environmental trigger: Diameter)

<span id="travelers-cloak"></span>
=== ''Traveler's Cloak'' ===

This handy cloak is a favorite among the Redcaps, as well as grogs who routinely sleep under the stars. When placed upon the ground, the cloak transforms the earth underneath so that it is soft and warm like a mattress. This effect ends at sunrise, assuring a hasty awakening.

MuTe(Ig) 25

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part Pen +0, 1/Day

This effect alters the earth under the cloak, softening it and warming it to the touch.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part, +1 Stone, +1 Ignem Req.)

<span id="vessel-of-etains-children"></span>
=== ''Vessel of Etain's Children'' ===

This sinister item is forged as a gold necklace with many fittings. The necklace itself has no power, but the jewel fittings hold a secret. When a drop of blood (easily gathered through ''Summon the Eldritch Bond'') is placed into an empty fitting, it is transmuted into a polished stone within the fitting. This keeps useful Arcane Connections nearby and in an inconspicuous state. As the necklace itself isn't magical, new fittings can be added as needed.

<span id="harden-the-eldritch-bond"></span>
=== '''Harden the Eldritch Bond''' ===

MuAq(Te) 23 R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind Pen +0, Constant Effect

When blood is placed within the enchanted fitting, it's transformed into an attractive polished stone. This doesn't alter the blood's Arcane Connection, which is part of its essential nature and will still last for years.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 2/say, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/sunset)

<span id="vulcans-favored"></span>
=== ''Vulcan's Favored'' ===

Vulcan's Favored isn't so much an item, but an effect that can be placed on items like tools, horseshoes, weapons, or any other commonly used metal object. Often a bronze seal is affixed to the item. The effect keeps it in repair and &quot;like new.&quot; With Vulcan's Favor, bent tools reshape themselves, worn horseshoes mend, and blades never dull. The items can be traded away, or used by the grogs around the covenant. Weapons with Vulcan's Favor are sought by paranoid magi who don't trust their own grogs, as they can't defeat even the weakest Magic Resistance.

<span id="vulcans-favor"></span>
=== '''Vulcan's Favor''' ===

CrTe 29

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

Pen +0, Constant Effect

Constantly repairs the enchanted item, extending the item's life and returning it to usefulness. The item always seems brand new.

(Base 15, +2 Sun, +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/sunset)

<span id="chapter-four"></span>
=== ''Chapter Four'' ===

<span id="gwidion-of-verditius"></span>
= ''Gwidion of Verditius'' =

'''Concept:''' A master at magically enhancing plants, his greatest creation may be the living tree that serves as his home.

Gwidion Griffith of Veriditius stands a towering four foot nothing, with thick curly brown hair, brown crows-footed eyes, and a lean frame. Gwidion has one more feature that truly sets him apart from other magi, he's tan. With skin weathered and wrinkled from a life lived with his hands in the dirt and his face in the sun, Gwidion commonly dresses as a farmer. Wearing a wide-brimmed straw hat, plain tunic and breeches, and simple sandals on his feet, Gwidion could almost be mistaken for a common peasant. However, the tall rune-engraved staff and large overthe-shoulder satchel betray Gwidion's status as a magus. Gwidion can usually be found with dirt and sap on his hands and knees, a long blade of grass in his mouth, and a smile upon his face. Gwidion was once considered one of the bright rising stars within his guild and house, but a violent disagreement with his master at Tribunal led him to earn the enmity of his guild when he voted against them on vis harvesting rights. Only a few years out of gauntlet, Gwidion left Durenmar in disgust and took to wandering in the deep woods and Welsh farmlands of his youth.

''Gwidion at Gauntlet''

'''Characteristics''': Int +3, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex –1, Qik –1

'''Size:''' –1 '''Age''': 21 (21)

'''Decrepitude:''' 0 (0) '''Warping Score:''' 0(0) '''Confidence Score:''' 1/3

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (trees); Affinity with Herbam, Affinity with Terram, Educated, Oak Gild Trained, Privileged Upbringing, Skilled Parens, Well-Traveled, Verditius Magic*; Curse of Venus, Twilight Prone; Gild Enmity (oak), Judged Unfairly, Slow Caster, Small Frame

\* House Virtue '''Personality Traits:''' Acquisitive +3, Charming +3, Independent +3

'''Reputations:''' None

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense –1, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack –1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Kick:'' Init –2, Attack –1, Defense –2, Damage +3

'''Soak:''' +3

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–4), –3 (5–8), –5 (9– 12), Incapacitated (13–16), Dead (17+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 4 (ritual magic), Charm 4 (being witty), Concentration 1 (lab work), Craft: Gardening 1 (trees), Latin 4 (Hermetic usages), Leadership 1 (inspiration), Magic Theory 4 (enchanting items), Masonry 1 (buildings), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (politics), Parma Magica 1 (Herbam), Philosophiae 1 (ritual magic), Survival 1 (forests), Welsh 5 (storytelling)

'''Arts: Cr''' 5, '''In''' 1, '''Mu''' 2, '''Pe''' 10, '''Re''' 18, '''An''' 0, '''Aq''' 0, '''Au''' 0, '''Co''' 0, '''He''' 10, '''Ig''' 8, '''Im''' 0, '''Me''' 1, '''Te''' 8, '''Vi''' 0

'''Twilight Scars:''' None

The Tree of Life has its roots in every religion and culture throughout the world. Often a symbol of immortality and fertility in Norse mythology, the taproots of this tree are thought to stretch deep down into underworld. Its branches reach high into the heavens, connecting the worlds together. To Jews and Christians the world tree is the tree from the Garden of Eden, from whose fruits eternal life might be gained. Gwidion became particularly obsessed with the legend of the world tree after defending some villagers from bandits. He entered Twilight and while there he had a vision of the mighty World Tree. After returning to the real world, he stopped his wanderings and settled into a relatively uninhabited wood to study, to build, and to comprehend the depths of his vision. He has not left the forest since.

'''Equipment:''' Gwidion keeps a pair of peasant work clothes in his pack, along with a basic survival kit, and some special handmade portable gardening tools (small rake, clippers, small shovel, etc.)

'''Encumbrance:''' None '''Spells Known:'''

''Circle of Eternal Spring'' (CrHe 4/+17) ''Ladder Of Ivy'' (CrHe 15/+17)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+13)

''Intuition of the Forest'' (InHe 10/ +13)

''Pass the Unyielding Portal'' (MuHe 5/+14)

''Prune Plant'' (PeHe 5/+22) ''Prison Floral'' (ReHe 4/+30)

''Ring of Ever Bloom'' (ReHe 15/+30)

''Tree Top Walk'' (ReHe 25/+30)

\*Warmth of the Wood (*CrIg 4/+15)

''Tilled Soil'' (ReTe 15/+28)

'''Appearance''': He has sap on his fingers, a blade of grass in his mouth, and dirt on his knees. Gwidion's tan skin makes him stick out among the other magi of the Order. He dresses much like a prosperous peasant.

'''Casting Sigil:''' Gwidion's casting sigil is the sound of trees bending in the wind; the more powerful the spell the louder this sound is.

'''Voting Sigil:''' Gwidion doesn't vote at tribunal anymore, but when he did his sigil was the image of the mythical world tree from his dreams.

<span id="gwidion-15-years"></span>
=== ''Gwidion +15 years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +3, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str –1, Sta +2, Dex –1, Qik –1

'''Size:''' –1 '''Age''': 36 (36) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 (1) '''Warping Score:''' 3 (0) '''Confidence Score:''' 1/3

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (trees); Affinity

with Herbam, Affinity with Terram, Educated, Oak Gild Trained, Privileged Upbringing, Skilled Parens, Well-Traveled, Verditius Magic*; Curse of Venus, Twilight Prone; Gild Enmity (oak), Judged Unfairly, Slow Caster, Small Frame

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Acquisitive +3, Charming +3, Independent +3

'''Reputations:''' None

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense –1, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack –1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Kick:'' Init –2, Attack –1, Defense –2, Damage +3

'''Soak:''' +3

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–4), –3 (5–8), –5 (9– 12), Incapacitated (13–16), Dead (17+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 4 (ritual magic), Charm 4 (being witty), Concentration 1 (lab work), Craft: Gardening 1 (trees), Latin 4 (Hermetic usages), Leadership 1 (inspiration), Magic Theory 5 (enchanting items), Masonry 1 (buildings), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (politics), Parma Magica 2 (Herbam), Philosophiae 1 (ritual magic), Survival 3 (forests), Welsh 5 (storytelling)

'''Arts: Cr''' 5, '''In''' 5, '''Mu''' 8, '''Pe''' 10, '''Re''' 21, '''An''' 2, '''Aq''' 1, '''Au''' 1, '''Co''' 1, '''He''' 21, '''Ig''' 8, '''Im''' 1, '''Me''' 1, '''Te''' 10, '''Vi''' 1

'''Twilight Scars:''' None

'''Equipment:''' Gwidion keeps a pair of peasant work clothes in his pack, along with a basic survival kit, and some special handmade portable gardening tools (small rake, clippers, small shovel, etc.)

'''Encumbrance:''' None '''Spells Known:'''

''Circle of Eternal Spring'' (CrHe 4/+28) ''Ladder Of Ivy'' (CrHe 15/+28) ''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+28) ''Intuition of the Forest'' (InHe 10/+28)

''Converse with Plant and Tree'' (InHe 25/+ 28)

''Pass the Unyielding Portal'' (MuHe 5/+31)

''Thaumaturgical Transformation of Plants to Iron''

(MuHe 20/+20)

''Prune Plant'' (PeHe 5/+33)

''Prison Floral'' (ReHe 4/+44) ''Ring of Ever Bloom'' (ReHe 15/+44)

''Controlled Growth'' (ReHe 25/+50)

''Tree Top Walk'' (ReHe 15/+44)

\*Warmth of the Wood (*CrIg 4/+15)

''Frosted Timber'' (PeIg 20*/+*20)

''Tilled Soil (ReTe 15/+33)''

''Mold the Earth within Sight'' (ReTe 25/+33)

'''Appearance''': At thirty, Gwidion traded his blade of grass for a sturdy walking stick. His skin is still tan, but is starting to wrinkle, although he still dresses more like a farmer then a magus.

'''Activities in the last fifteen years:''' After much travel in his youth, Gwidion finds an unoccupied forest in which to locate his covenant, far from Durenmar and with only a limited aura. After setting up his lab, Gwidion struggles to help the peasants of the sounding villages as drought and famine wreak havoc. With the aid of his magic, Gwidion is able to help bring bountiful crops in each season and even keep many of the village homes warm during the following winter. During his travels, Gwidion earned 60 experience points in Abilities, 245 experience points in Arts, and designed 145 levels of spells.

<span id="gwidion-30-years"></span>
=== ''Gwidion +30 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +3, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str –1, Sta +2, Dex –1, Qik –1

'''Size:''' –1

'''Age''': 51 (51) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 (2) '''Warping Score:''' 4 (8)

'''Confidence Score:''' 1/3 '''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (trees); Affinity with Herbam, Affinity with Terram, Educated, Oak Gild Trained, Privileged Upbringing, Skilled Parens, Well-Traveled, Verditius Magic*; Curse of Venus, Twilight Prone; Gild Enmity (oak), Judged Unfairly, Slow Caster, Small Frame

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Acquisitive +3, Charming +3, Independent +3

'''Reputations:''' None

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense –1, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack –1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Kick:'' Init –2, Attack –1, Defense –2, Damage +3

'''Soak:''' +3

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–4), –3 (5–8), –5 (9– 12), Incapacitated (13–16), Dead (17+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 4 (ritual magic), Charm 4 (being witty), Concentration 4 (lab work), Craft: Gardening 2 (trees), Latin 4 (Hermetic usages), Leadership 2 (inspiration), Magic Theory 5 (enchanting items), Masonry 2 (buildings), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (politics), Parma Magica 5 (Herbam), Philosophiae 4 (ritual magic), Survival 5 (forests), Welsh 5 (storytelling)

'''Arts: Cr''' 5, '''In''' 5, '''Mu''' 12, '''Pe''' 12, '''Re''' 21, '''An''' 3, '''Aq''' 1, '''Au''' 2, '''Co''' 1, '''He''' 21, '''Ig''' 8, '''Im''' 3, '''Me''' 1, '''Te''' 10, '''Vi''' 1

'''Twilight Scars:''' None

'''Equipment:''' Gwidion keeps a pair of peasant work clothes in his pack, along with a basic survival kit, and some special handmade portable gardening tools (small rake, clippers, small shovel, etc.)

'''Encumbrance:''' None

'''Spells Known:'''

''Circle of Eternal Spring'' (CrHe 4/+28)

''Ladder Of Ivy'' (CrHe 15/+28)

''Fast Grow'' (CrHe 30/+28)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+28)

''Intuition of the Forest'' (InHe 10/+28)

''Converse with Plant and Tree'' (InHe 25/+28)

''Pass the Unyielding Portal'' (MuHe 5/+35)

''Thaumaturgical Transformation of Plants to Iron'' (MuHe 20/+24)

''Gigantic Growth'' (MuHe 25/+35)

''Blades of Grass, Leaves of Cutting'' (MuHe

30/+35)

''Prune Plant'' (PeHe 5/+35)

''Wilt'' (PeHe 25/+35)

''Prison Floral'' (ReHe 4/+ 44)

''Ring of Ever Bloom'' (ReHe 15/+44)

''Controlled Growth'' (ReHe 25/+53)

''Tree Top Walk'' (ReHe 25/+44)

\*Warmth of the Wood (*CrIg 4/+15)

''Frosted Timber'' (PeIg 20/*+*22)

''Tilled Soil (ReTe 15/+33)''

''Mold the Earth within Sight'' (ReTe 25/+33)

'''Appearance:''' Gwidon's skin is deeply wrinkled now, and he leans more heavily on his walking stick, a side effect of starting his longevity ritual so late in life.

'''Activities in the last fifteen years:''' While he might not get out as much anymore to plow the fields with his fellow covenfolk, his magic is still quite active in the development of vast farmlands. That brings

<span id="magi-of-hermes-16"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

in the majority of his covenant's income. During the summer of his 50th year, Gwidion felt the effects of age at last creeping up on him, so he took a sabbatical from his usual research to trade his skills as a lab assistant for a longevity ritual. The ritual cost him 14 pawns of Creo vis and grants him a bonus of +5 to add to his covenant's bonus of +1, for a total aging modifier of 6. During this period, Gwidion earned 225 experience in Abilities, 75 experience in Arts, and designed 120 levels of spells.

<span id="gwidion-45-years"></span>
=== ''Gwidion +45 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +3, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str –1, Sta +2, Dex –1, Qik –1

'''Size:''' –1

'''Age''': 66 (60)

'''Decrepitude:''' 0 (2)

'''Warping Score:''' 4 (23)

'''Confidence Score:''' 1/3

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (trees); Affinity with Herbam, Affinity with Terram, Educated, Oak Gild Trained, Privileged Upbringing, Skilled Parens, Well-Traveled, Verditius Magic*; Curse of Venus, Twilight Prone; Gild Enmity (oak), Judged Unfairly, Slow Caster, Small Frame

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Acquisitive +3, Charming +3, Independent +3

'''Reputations:''' None

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense –1, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack –1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Kick:'' Init –2, Attack –1, Defense –2, Damage +3

'''Soak:''' +3

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–4), –3 (5–8), –5 (9– 12), Incapacitated (13–16), Dead (17+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 4 (ritual magic), Charm 4 (being witty), Concentration 4 (lab work), Craft: Gardening 2 (trees), Latin 4 (Hermetic usages), Leadership 2 (inspiration), Magic Theory 5 (enchanting items), Masonry 2 (buildings), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (politics), Parma Magica 5 (Herbam), Philosophiae 4 (ritual magic), Survival 5 (forests), Welsh 5 (storytelling)

'''Arts: Cr''' 6, '''In''' 13, '''Mu''' 20, '''Pe''' 12, '''Re''' 21, '''An''' 3, '''Aq''' 1, '''Au''' 2, '''Co''' 1, '''He''' 25, '''Ig''' 8, '''Im''' 13, '''Me''' 2, '''Te''' 10, '''Vi''' 1

'''Twilight Scars:''' None

'''Equipment:''' Gwidion keeps a pair of peasant work clothes in his pack, along with a basic survival kit, and some special handmade portable gardening tools (small rake, clippers, small shovel, etc.)

'''Encumbrance:''' None

'''Spells Known:'''

''Circle of Eternal Spring'' (CrHe 4/+33)

''Ladder Of Ivy'' (CrHe 15/+33)

''Fast Grow'' (CrHe 30/+33)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+40)

''Intuition of the Forest'' (InHe 10/+40)

''Converse with Plant and Tree'' (InHe 25/+40)

''Pass the Unyielding Portal'' (MuHe 5/+47)

''Thaumaturgical Transformation of Plants to Iron'' (MuHe 20/+32)

''Gigantic Growth'' (MuHe 25/+47)

''Razor Thorns'' (MuHe(Te) 25/+32)

''Blades of Grass, Leaves of Cutting'' (MuHe

30/+47)

''Awaken Consciousness of Plants'' (MuHe(Me)

55/+34)

''Prune Plant'' (PeHe 5/+39)

''Wilt'' (PeHe 25/+39)

''Prison Floral'' (ReHe 4/+48)

''Ring of Ever Bloom'' (ReHe 15/+48)

''Controlled Growth'' (ReHe 25/+57)

''Tree Top Walk'' (ReHe 25/+48)

\*Warmth of the Wood (*CrIg 4/+16)

''Frosted Timber'' (PeIg 20/*+*22)

''Sight of the Blossom, Ears of the Oak'' (I Im

30/+28)

''Tilled Soil'' (Re Te 15/+33) ''Mold the Earth within Sight'' (ReTe 25/+33)

'''Appearance:''' Gwidion's hair has gone near completely white now, and his face is near something close to a tanned, wrinkled prune, but he is still strong and his muscles still toned.

'''Activities in the last fifteen years:''' Gwidion spends much of his time strolling in the forest and awakening or just generally conversing with the plants. During this period, Gwidion earned 365 experience in Arts and designed 115 levels of spells.

<span id="gwidion-60-years"></span>
=== ''Gwidion +60 years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +3, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str –1, Sta +2, Dex –1, Qik –1

'''Size:''' –1

'''Age''': 81 (68) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 (2)

'''Warping Score:''' 5 (13) '''Confidence Score:''' 1/3

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (trees); Affinity with Herbam, Affinity with Terram, Edu-

cated, Oak Gild Trained, Privileged Upbringing, Skilled Parens, Well-Traveled, Verditius Magic*; Curse of Venus, Twilight Prone; Gild Enmity (oak), Judged Unfairly, Slow Caster, Small Frame

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Acquisitive +3, Charming +3, Independent +3

'''Reputations:''' None

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense –1, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack –1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Kick:'' Init –2, Attack –1, Defense –2, Damage +3

'''Soak:''' +3

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–4), –3 (5–8), –5 (9– 12), Incapacitated (13–16), Dead (17+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 4 (ritual magic), Charm 4 (being witty), Concentration 4 (lab work), Craft: Gardening 2 (trees), Latin 4 (Hermetic usages), Leadership 2 (inspiration), Magic Theory 7 (enchanting items), Masonry 2 (buildings), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (politics), Parma Magica 5 (Herbam), Philosophiae 4 (ritual magic), Survival 5 (forests), Welsh 5 (storytelling)

'''Arts: Cr''' 15, '''In''' 14, '''Mu''' 20, '''Pe''' 12, '''Re''' 21, '''An''' 17, '''Aq''' 2, '''Au''' 2, '''Co''' 2, '''He''' 25, I'''g''' 8, '''Im''' 14, '''Me''' 7, '''Te''' 15, '''Vi''' 1

'''Twilight Scars:''' The magus must stand in the sunlight for an hour after every meal or his food will not digest.

'''Equipment:''' Gwidion keeps a pair of peasant work clothes in his pack, along with a basic survival kit, and some special handmade portable gardening tools (small rake, clippers, small shovel, etc.)

'''Encumbrance:''' None

'''Spells Known:'''

''Voice of the King'' (ReAn 40/+40)

''Circle of Eternal Spring'' (CrHe 4/+42)

''Ladder Of Ivy'' (CrHe 15/+42)

''Fast Grow'' (CrHe 30/+42)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+41)

''Intuition of the Forest'' (InHe 10/+41)

''Converse with Plant and Tree'' (InHe 25/+41)

''Pass the Unyielding Portal'' (MuHe 5/+47)

''Thaumaturgical Transformation of Plants to Iron'' (MuHe 20/+36)

''Gigantic Growth'' (MuHe 25/+47)

''Razor Thorns'' (MuHe(Te) 25/+37)

''Blades of Grass, Leaves of Cutting'' (MuHe 30/+47)

''Awaken Consciousness of Plants'' (MuHe(Me) 55/+39)

''Prune Plant'' (PeHe 5/+39)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-17"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

''Wilt'' (PeHe 25/+39)

''Prison Floral'' (ReHe 4/+48)

''Ring of Ever Bloom'' (ReHe 15/+48)

''Controlled Growth'' (ReHe 25/+57)

''Tree Top Walk'' (ReHe 25/+48)

\*Warmth of the Wood (*CrIg 4/+25)

''Frosted Timber'' (PeIg 20/*+*22)

''Sight of the Blossom, Ears of the Oak'' (InIm 30/+30)

''Probe for Pure Silver'' (InTe 4/+31)

''Tilled Soil'' (ReTe 15/+38)

''Mold the Earth within Sight'' (ReTe 25/+38)

'''Appearance:''' His pure white air has started to thin, his face to develop the old withered scars of advanced age. Yet his stamina is still better than most a third his age, and his physique is still firm with health.

'''Activities in the last fifteen years:''' Bees have become a new obsession for the old magus, and after a few years of study and several bits of parchment sent to Durenmar on the matter, the covenant can now add the year-round production of honey to its annual income. During this period, Gwidion earned 65 experience in Abilities, 345 experience in Arts, and designed 40 levels in spells.

<span id="gwidion-75-years"></span>
=== ''Gwidion +75 years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +3, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str –2, Sta +2, Dex –1, Qik –1

'''Size:''' –1

'''Age''': 96 (81) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 (3)

'''Warping Score:''' 5 (29) '''Confidence Score:''' 1/3

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (trees); Affinity with Herbam, Affinity with Terram, Educated, Oak Gild Trained, Privileged Upbringing, Skilled Parens, Well-Traveled, Verditius Magic*; Curse of Venus, Twilight Prone; Gild Enmity (oak), Judged Unfairly, Slow Caster, Small Frame

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Acquisitive +3, Charming +3, Independent +3

'''Reputations:''' None

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense –1, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack –1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Kick:'' Init –2, Attack –1, Defense –2, Damage +3

'''Soak:''' +3

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–4), –3 (5–8), –5 (9–

12), Incapacitated (13–16), Dead (17+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 4 (ritual magic), Charm 4 (being witty), Concentration 4 (lab work), Craft: Gardening 2 (trees), Latin 4 (Hermetic usages), Leadership 2 (inspiration), Magic Theory 10 (enchanting items), Masonry 2 (buildings), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (politics), Parma Magica 5 (Herbam), Philosophiae 4 (ritual magic), Survival 5 (forests), Welsh 5 (storytelling)

'''Arts: Cr''' 25, '''In''' 14, '''Mu''' 22, '''Pe''' 12, '''Re''' 21, '''An''' 17, '''Aq''' 2, '''Au''' 2, '''Co''' 2, '''He''' 25, '''Ig''' 8, '''Im''' 14, '''Me''' 8,

'''Te''' 20, '''Vi''' 1

'''Powers:''' None

'''Twilight Scars:''' The magus must stand in the sunlight for an hour after every meal or his food will not digest. Also, compelling voice.

'''Equipment:''' Gwidion keeps a pair of peasant work clothes in his pack, along with a basic survival kit, and some special handmade portable gardening tools (small rake, clippers, small shovel, etc.)

'''Encumbrance:''' None

'''Spells Known:'''

''Voice of the King'' (ReAn 40/+40)

''Circle of Eternal Spring'' (CrHe 4/+52)

''Ladder Of Ivy'' (CrHe 15/+52)

''Fast Grow'' (CrHe 30/+52)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+41)

''Intuition of the Forest'' (InHe 10/+41)

''Converse with Plant and Tree'' (InHe 25/+41)

''Pass the Unyielding Portal'' (MuHe 5/+49)

''Thaumaturgical Transformation of Plants to Iron'' (MuHe 20/+44)

''Gigantic Growth'' (MuHe 25/+49)

''Razor Thorns'' (MuHe(Te) 25/+44)

''Blades of Grass, Leaves of Cutting'' (MuHe

30/+49)

''Awaken Consciousness of Plants'' (MuHe(Me) 55/+42)

''Prune Plant'' (PeHe 5/+39)

''Wilt'' (PeHe 25/+39)

''Prison Floral'' (ReHe 4/+48)

''Ring of Ever Bloom'' (ReHe 15/+48)

''Controlled Growth'' (ReHe 25/+57)

''Tree Top Walk'' (ReHe 25/+48)

''Probe for Pure Silver'' (InTe 4/+36)

''Tilled Soil'' (ReTe 15/+43)

''Mold the Earth within Sight'' (ReTe 25/+43)

\*Warmth of the Wood (*CrIg 4/+35)

''Frosted Timber'' (PeIg 20/*+*22)

''Sight of the Blossom, Ears of the Oak'' (InIm 30/+30)

'''Appearance:''' His hair has gone almost completely from the top of his head, leaving only the hair along the sides of his skull, which he lets grow as long as it likes.

Age has now caught up with him, and he leans heavily on his stick as he walks.

'''Activities in the last fifteen years:''' During the spring of his 93rd year, Gwidion once again traded services with a fellow magus for a longevity ritual. The ritual cost him 19 pawns of Creo vis and granted him a bonus of +9 to add to his covenant's bonus of +1, for a total aging modifier of 10. During this period, Gwidion earned 135 experience in Abilities and 316 experience in Arts.

<span id="gwidion-94-years"></span>
=== ''Gwidion +94 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +3, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str –2, Sta +2, Dex –1, Qik –1

'''Size:''' –1 '''Age''': 115 (93) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 (3) '''Warping Score:''' 6 (18) '''Confidence Score:''' 1/3

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (trees); Affinity with Herbam, Affinity with Terram, Educated, Oak Gild Trained, Privileged Upbringing, Skilled Parens, Well-Traveled, Verditius Magic*; Curse of Venus, Twilight Prone; Gild Enmity (oak), Judged Unfairly, Slow Caster, Small Frame

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Acquisitive +3, Charming +3, Independent +3

'''Reputations:''' None

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense –1, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack –1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Kick:'' Init –2, Attack –1, Defense –2, Damage +3

'''Soak:''' +3

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–4), –3 (5–8), –5 (9– 12), Incapacitated (13–16), Dead (17+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 4 (ritual magic), Charm 4 (being witty), Concentration 4 (lab work), Craft: Gardening 2 (trees), Latin 4 (Hermetic usages), Leadership 2 (inspiration), Magic Theory 10 (enchanting items), Masonry 2 (buildings), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (politics), Parma Magica 5 (Herbam), Philosophiae 4 (ritual magic), Survival 5 (forests), Welsh 5 (storytelling)

'''Arts: Cr''' 25, '''In''' 14, '''Mu''' 22, '''Pe''' 12, '''Re''' 25, '''An''' 17, '''Aq''' 2, '''Au''' 2, '''Co''' 2, '''He''' 25, '''Ig''' 8, '''Im''' 14, '''Me''' 25, '''Te''' 25, '''Vi''' 1

'''Powers:''' None

<span id="magi-of-hermes-18"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

'''Twilight Scars:''' The magus must stand in the sunlight for an hour after every meal or his food will not digest. Compelling voice. His footsteps leave puddles behind him.

'''Equipment:''' Gwidion keeps a pair of peasant work clothes in his pack, along with a basic survival kit, and some special handmade portable gardening tools (small rake, clippers, small shovel, etc.)

'''Encumbrance:''' None

'''Spells Known:'''

''Voice of the King'' (ReAn 40/+44) ''Circle of Eternal Spring'' (CrHe 4/+52)

''Ladder Of Ivy'' (CrHe 15/+52)

''Fast Grow'' (CrHe 30/+52) ''Fortress of Oak'' (CrHe 40/+49)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+41)

''Intuition of the Forest'' (InHe 10/+41)

''Converse with Plant and Tree'' (InHe 25/+41)

''Pass the Unyielding Portal'' (MuHe 5/+49)

''Thaumaturgical Transformation of Plants to Iron'' (MuHe 20/+49)

''Gigantic Growth'' (MuHe 25/+49)

''Razor Thorns'' (MuHe(Te) 25/+49)

''Blades of grass, Leaves of Cutting'' (MuHe 30/+49) ''Awaken Consciousness of Plant'' (MuHe(Me)

55/+58)

''Prune Plant'' (PeHe 5/+39)

''Wilt'' (PeHe 25/+39)

''Prison Floral'' (ReHe 4/+52)

''Ring of Ever Bloom'' (ReHe 15/+52)

''Controlled Growth'' (ReHe 25/+61)

''Tree Top Walk'' (ReHe 25/ +52)

''Command of the Forest'' (ReHe(Me) 55/+52)

\*Warmth of the Wood (*CrIg 4/+35)

''Frosted Timber'' (PeIg 20/*+*22)

''Sight of the Blossom, Ears of the Oak'' (InIm 30/+30)

''Probe for Pure Silver'' (InTe 4/+41)

''Tilled Soil'' (ReTe 15/+52)

''Mold the Earth Within Sight'' (ReTe 25/+52)

'''Appearance:''' His Twilight scars have helped keep that golden tan upon his wrinkled, near-bald skin. Other than the loss of nearly all of his hair, he is still the same magus as he was at ninety-three.

'''Activities in the last nineteen years:''' Gwidion concocted a spell that built a great fortress of oak, dirt, and green limbs. During this period, Gwidion earned 460 experience points in Arts and designed 105 levels of spells.

<span id="gwidion-105-years"></span>
=== ''Gwidion +105 years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +3, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str –2, Sta +2, Dex –1, Qik –1

'''Size:''' –1

'''Warping Score:''' 6 (29) '''Confidence Score:''' 1/3

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (trees); Affinity with Herbam, Affinity with Terram, Educated, Oak Gild Trained, Privileged Upbringing, Skilled Parens, Well-Traveled, Verditius Magic*; Curse of Venus, Twilight Prone; Gild Enmity (oak), Judged Unfairly, Slow Caster, Small Frame

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Acquisitive +3, Charming +3, Independent +3

'''Reputations:''' None

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense –1, Damage n/a

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack –1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Kick:'' Init –2, Attack –1, Defense –2, Damage +3

'''Soak:''' +3

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–4), –3 (5–8), –5 (9– 12), Incapacitated (13–16), Dead (17+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 4 (ritual magic), Charm 4 (being witty), Concentration 4 (lab work), Craft: Gardening 2 (trees), Latin 4 (Hermetic usages), Leadership 2 (inspiration), Magic Theory 10 (enchanting items), Masonry 2 (buildings), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (politics), Parma Magica 5 (Herbam), Philosophiae 4 (ritual magic), Survival 5 (forests), Welsh 5 (storytelling)

'''Arts: Cr''' 25, '''In''' 14, '''Mu''' 22, '''Pe''' 15, '''Re''' 25, '''An''' 17, '''Aq''' 2, '''Au''' 2, '''Co''' 2, '''He''' 25, '''Ig''' 15, '''Im''' 14, '''Me''' 25, '''Te''' 25, '''Vi''' 1

'''Powers:''' None

'''Twilight Scars:''' The magus must stand in the sunlight for an hour after every meal or his food will not digest. Compelling voice. His footsteps leave puddles behind him. People want to listen to him.

'''Equipment:''' Riding Tree talisman. Also, Gwidion keeps a pair of peasant work clothes in his pack, along with a basic survival kit, and some special handmade portable gardening tools (small rake, clippers, small shovel, etc.)

'''Encumbrance:''' None

'''Spells Known:'''

''Voice of the King'' (ReAn 40/+44) ''Circle of Eternal Spring'' (CrHe 4/+52)

''Ladder Of Ivy'' (CrHe 15/+52)

''Fast Grow'' (CrHe 30/+52)

''Fortress of Oak'' (CrHe 40 /+49)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+41)

''Intuition of the Forest'' (InHe 10/+41) ''Converse with Plant and Tree'' (InHe 25/+41) ''Pass the Unyielding Portal'' (MuHe 5/+49) ''Thaumaturgical Transformation of Plants to Iron'' (MuHe 20/+49)

''Gigantic Growth'' (MuHe 25/+49) ''Razor Thorns'' (MuHe(Te) 25/+49) ''Blades of Grass, Leaves of Cutting'' (MuHe 30/+49)

''Awaken Consciousness of Plants'' (MuHe(Me) 55/+58)

''Prune Plant'' (PeHe 5/+39)

''Wilt'' (PeHe 25/+39) ''Prison Floral'' (ReHe 4/+52)

''Ring of Ever Bloom'' (ReHe 15/+52)

''Controlled Growth'' (ReHe 25/+61)

''Tree Top Walk'' (ReHe 25/+52)

''Command of the Forest'' (ReHe(Me) 55/+52)

\*Warmth of the Wood (*CrIg 4/+35)

''Frosted Timber'' (PeIg 20/*+*22)

''Sight of the Blossom, Ears of the Oak'' (InIm 30/+30)

''Probe for Pure Silver'' (InTe 4/+41) ''Tilled Soil'' (ReTe 15/+52)

''Mold the Earth within Sight'' (ReTe 25/+52)

'''Appearance:''' Unable to walk at all now without help, his frail, withered frame is nothing like the man who once used to hike the mountains and forest paths of his youth.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-19"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

'''Activities in the last eleven years:''' Gwidion adopted a sapling from the forest fire years back and made it his talisman. Enchanting it with movement, it now carries him from place to place and is his constant companion in these, the twilight years of his life. Knowing that death or Final Twilight await, Gwidion spent much of this time seeing that the covenant is enchanted with every form of comfort, that his forest is given adequate protection from fire and drought, and that his hives of bees is set up just so. He has plans to permanently awaken Edward (his pet name for his riding tree), and enchant into the large oak powers to awaken other trees to life and movement, call rainstorms, and protect his forest and friends from harm from until ''Disenchantment'' brings the great oak down. However, that will only happen if he manages to last another fifteen years. During this period, Gwidion earned 126 experience points in Arts and spent 16 seasons in the lab enchanting items in an effort to prepare his covenant for the day he will no longer be there.

Gwidion has devised the following new spells.

<span id="animal-spells-2"></span>
=== ''Animal Spells'' ===

<span id="voice-of-the-king"></span>
=== '''Voice of the King''' ===

ReAn 40

R: Voice, D: Diameter, T: Group

This spell works much as ''Commanding the Harnessed Beast'' ('''ArM5''', page 120), with the exception that it is designed exclusively to work on whole swarms of bees (a swarm of bees weighs less than a pig, so no size adjustment is necessary). Bees are fairly intelligent as insects go, but they're still just insects, so vague or overly complex commands are not likely to be very effective. The bees will probably still attempt the task even if they don't understand it. Note that usurping the king bee's authority can anger the hive once the spell wears off.

(Base 15, +2 Voice, +1 Diameter, +1 Group)

<span id="herbam-spells-2"></span>
=== ''Herbam Spells'' ===

<span id="circle-of-eternal-spring"></span>
==== '''Circle of Eternal Spring''' ====

CrHe 4

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

This spell ensures that all plants within the circle grow well. It has the same effect as ''The Bountiful Feast'' ('''ArM5''', page 135), but is based on Ring Duration and Circle Target.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Ring)

<span id="ladder-of-ivy"></span>
=== '''Ladder Of Ivy''' ===

CrHe 15

R: Voice, D:Sun, T:Individual

This spell creates a sturdy ladder of ivy that the magus or others can use to scale any wall or (low) cliff. The ivy withers at sunrise or sunset, and can reach up about twenty paces.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

<span id="fast-grow"></span>
=== '''Fast Grow''' ===

CrHe 30

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual

This spell brings a plant to full maturity in a single day or night. Note that the spell must be cast soon after sunrise or sunset for the duration to be long enough for its effect.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="fortress-of-oak"></span>
==== '''Fortress of Oak''' ====

Cr(Mu)He(Te) 40

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Individual, Ritual This ritual is normally cast on an acorn from an oak tree and it works like the spell ''Conjuring the Mystic Tower'' ('''ArM5''', page 153) with the exception that it utilizes a tree rather than stone. The tree springs from the ground in moments, towering to its full height of around eighty feet. The tree is still alive, but it has chambers within, complete with earthen floors and earthen hearths for fires. The magus decides the shape and design of the chambers when casting the spell. If the tree dies, the tower remains, now being a dead tree.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +3 Size, +3 Elaborate, +1 Terram Requisite, +1 Muto Requisite)

<span id="gigantic-growth"></span>
=== '''Gigantic Growth''' ===

MuHe 25

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual

This spell instantly increases the size of any plant by a factor of 100, turning bushes into barriers and saplings into mighty oaks. The plants instantly return to normal size at the end of the spell's duration. Larger plants only grow to 100 times the size of a base Individual, but they can be affected.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Unnatural, +2 Size)

<span id="razor-thorns"></span>
==== '''Razor Thorns''' ====

MuHe(Te) 25

R: Voice, D: Diameter, T: Group

This spell causes razor-sharp thorns to spring out of every plant or plant-made product in an area within the range of the caster's voice. These thorns deal +10 damage to up to a standard group of people (up to ten). The thorns eventually retreat, but they remain for roughly two minutes and can still act as a viable deterrent as the thorns are still just as sharp as a knife.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +1 Diameter, +2 Group)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-20"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="blades-of-grass-leaves-of-cutting"></span>
= '''Blades of Grass, Leaves of Cutting''' =

MuHe 30

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group

This spell makes all the grass and leaves of a group of plants as sharp as a sword's blade; this can make an area utterly impassable for even the most armored of individuals.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group)

<span id="awaken-consciousness-of-plant"></span>
==== '''Awaken Consciousness of Plant''' ====

MuHe(Me) 55

R: Voice, D: Year, T: Group, Ritual

This spell works exactly as the spell, ''Stir the Slumbering Tree'' ('''ArM5''', page 137), only it is used to awaken multiple plants at once rather than one or two at a time. Once raised, the plants have a state of consciousness that resembles that of a human. The plants can see and hear what's going on around them and at a normal human level of perception. Such plants tend to share some mental attributes or personality traits with the caster. The plants can rearrange their leaves, stems, or branches over the course of several hours, though too slowly for people to observe the movement from second to second. The size bonus enables the spell to awaken an entire forest grove in one go.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +4 Year, +2 Group, +2 Size)

<span id="prune-plant"></span>
==== '''Prune Plant''' ====

Pe(Re)He 20

R: Voice, D: Momentary, T: Individual

The magus can instantly trim various parts of a plant into any shape that he wishes. The magi must specify the shape of the plant when he casts the spell. The magus cannot increase the size of the plant, nor kill a plant by over-pruning it with this spell, but he can remove or rearrange the branches and leaves in any way that he likes, just as if he where pruning it normally.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 size, +1 Rego Requisite)

<span id="wilt"></span>
==== '''Wilt''' ====

PeHe 35

R: Voice, D: Momentary, T: Part

This spell causes a plant to wilt and die instantly, though it does not affect any enchantments or spells currently on the plant. Larger plants are still affected, but only parts of them at a time when the spell is cast.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 Part, +3 size)

<span id="ring-of-ever-bloom"></span>
==== '''Ring of Ever Bloom''' ====

ReHe 15

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

This spell forces the plant or flower to continue to bloom even out of season.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Ring)

<span id="controlled-growth"></span>
=== '''Controlled Growth''' ===

ReHe 25

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Individual, Ritual

Using this spell, the magus can shape the growth of a plant over the course of the next year, as if he were properly pruning it, caring for it, and so on. The eventual shape of the plant is determined when the spell is cast and it can be as simple or as complex as the magus desires, although truly complicated designs, such as making a bush grow in the shape of someone's face, may require a Finesse check. Once the plant reaches the shape and dimensions that the magus wishes, it stops growing until the spell ends or a new spell is cast upon it. Once the spell ends, the plant will then grow normally, but it still retains its magically 'pruned' shape, until it grows naturally out of it. Fast grow spells, or other methods used to accelerate the growth of plants, will still work, but until this spell ends the plant will not grow past the design limits originally set. This spell does not change the essential nature of the plant nor give it anything that an exceptionally good gardener couldn't.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +4 Year)

<span id="tree-top-walk"></span>
=== '''Tree Top Walk''' ===

ReHe 25

R: Voice, D: Concentration, T: Group

This spell moves the branches of nearby trees so that the magus can literally walk from one tree to the next without ever touching the ground. The trees do not uproot themselves, but they do bend in unnatural ways to help the magus reach them and walk unhindered from branch to branch. Of course, the trees' branches still need to be strong enough to support the magus' weight.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +1 Concentration, +2 Group)

<span id="prison-floral"></span>
=== '''Prison Floral''' ===

ReHe 30

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

In an effort to protect his grogs, Gwidion developed this spell after discovering that many of his enchanted plants were starting to Warp under his magical effects. A circle is drawn around many of the aggressively Warped plants to help contain them and protect others from their more-bizarre effects. The spell imprisons the plant within the circle.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Ring)

<span id="command-of-the-forest"></span>
==== '''Command of the Forest''' ====

ReHe(Me) 55

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group, Ritual

The magus can make a whole wood of plants (up to 10,000 individuals in mass) move with purpose and intelligence to obey the magus' commands, even if those commands are to uproot and run directly into a bonfire or to hit someone with its branches. The plants continue to obey the command until either the task is complete or the spell expires.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group, +3 size)

<span id="ignem-spells-2"></span>
=== ''Ignem Spells'' ===

<span id="warmth-of-the-wood"></span>
==== '''Warmth of the Wood''' ====

CrIg 10

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

This spell heats the bark of a tree, the wood of a cart, or even the planks of a house so that it is warm to the touch. This a good effect to help dispel the chill of the night and keep the magus warm without having to build a fire.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

<span id="frosted-timber"></span>
=== '''Frosted Timber''' ===

PeIg 20

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

This spell cools the bark of a tree, the wood of a cart, or even the planks of a house so that it is cool to the touch. This a good effect to help dispel the heat of the night and keep the magus cool during the hotter seasons.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-21"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="imaginem-spells-2"></span>
=== ''Imaginem Spells'' ===

<span id="sight-of-the-blossom-ears-of-the-oak"></span>
= '''Sight of the Blossom, Ears of the Oak''' =

InIm 30

R: Arcane Connection, D: Sun, T: Group While using this spell, the magus can see and hear what's happening in a distant place if he possesses some sort of Arcane Connection to either the location or the person he's scrying upon. Gwidion normally uses leaves or flower buds from trees and bushes all around his forest to help keep an eye on what's going on when he's not there.

(Base 2, +4 Arcane Connection, +2 Sun, +2 Group)

<span id="terram-spells-2"></span>
=== ''Terram Spells'' ===

<span id="tilled-soil"></span>
==== '''Tilled Soil''' ====

ReTe 15

R: Voice, D: Momentary, T: Part

This spell instantly tills an amount of soil equal to that of 1000 cubic paces, making it perfect for planting crops or just soft enough to lie down upon comfortably.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Part, +2 Size)

<span id="mold-the-earth-within-sight"></span>
==== '''Mold the Earth within Sight''' ====

ReTe 30

R: Sight, D: Momentary, T: Part

Using this spell, the magus can shape an amount of earth equal to the mass of a hundred men into any form that he likes, although truly complicated forms may require a Finesse check. This spell was originally invented to help build quick walls or boundaries (even hasty circles), but its applications could be broader. This spell only works on dirt, rock, and stone; other more-exotic forms of Terram (metal, diamonds, gemstones, etc.) are unaffected.

(Base 2, +3 Sight, +1 Part, +1 Size, +1 Elaborate, +2 stone)

<span id="enchanted-items-2"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Gwidion created the following items.

<span id="staff-of-silent-forest-stride"></span>
=== ''Staff of Silent Forest Stride'' ===

All plants that are touched by this lesser enchanted item make no sound when they are pushed side, stepped on, or brushed up against.

Lesser Enchanted Item, 3 pawns Perdo vis to invest.

<span id="silent-forest"></span>
==== '''Silent forest''' ====

PeIm(He) 25

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Voice, D: Diameter, T: Part

This effect destroys all sound species that a plant could make for the duration of the spell, but it does not affect any sound species produced by the magus.

(Base 1, +2 Voice, +1 Diameter, +1 Part, +1 Size, Unlimited uses +10 lvls)

<span id="stone-disk-of-warmth-of-wood"></span>
=== ''Stone Disk of Warmth of Wood'' ===

These disks were enchanted so as to keep the entire covenant warm during the cooler months of the year. During the hotter months, the disks are kept inside a steel box just outside the covenant to prevent their effects from unbalancing the covenant's winter enchantments.

Lesser Enchanted Item, 3 pawns Creo vis to invest.

<span id="warmth-of-the-wood-1"></span>
==== '''Warmth of the Wood''' ====

CrIg 24

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Structure

This effect keeps the covenant warm during the winter. (See the new spell, earlier.)

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +3 Structure, +3 lvls Environmental Trigger (Sunrise/Sunset), +1 Herbam Requisite, +1 lvl 2 uses a day)

<span id="stone-disk-of-frosted-timber"></span>
=== ''Stone Disk of Frosted Timber'' ===

These disks were enchanted to keep the entire covenant cool during the hotter months of the year. During the cooler months, the disks are kept inside a steel box just outside the covenant to prevent their effects from unbalancing the covenant's summer enchantments.

Lesser Enchanted Item, 4 pawns of Perdo vis to invest.

<span id="frosted-timber-1"></span>
=== '''Frosted Timber''' ===

PeIg(He) 39

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Structure

This effect keeps the Covenant cool during the spring and summer. (See the new spell, earlier.)

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +3 Structure, +3 lvls Environmental Trigger (Sunrise/Sunset), +1 Herbam Requisite, +1 lvl 2 uses a day)

<span id="stone-disk-of-evergreen"></span>
=== ''Stone Disk of Evergreen'' ===

This stone disk, roughly the size of a large shield, is usually kept near the covenant's hearth and keeps all the plants within the covenant healthy year round.

Lesser Enchanted Item, 4 pawns of Creo vis.

<span id="evergreen"></span>
==== '''Evergreen''' ====

CrHe 34

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Structure

This Effect keeps a Plant in perfect health all year round.

(Effect: Base 1, +1 Touch,+2 Sun, +3 Structure, +3 Size; +3 lvls Environmental Trigger (Sunrise/Sunset), +1 lvls 2/day)

<span id="stone-disk-of-controlled-growth"></span>
=== ''Stone Disk of Controlled Growth'' ===

This stone disk, roughly the size of a large shield, is usually kept near the covenant's hearth and keeps all the plants within the covenant from growing out of control.

Lesser Enchanted Item, 5 pawns of Herbam vis to invest.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-22"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="controlled-growth-1"></span>
=== '''Controlled Growth''' ===

ReHe 49

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Structure

This effect keeps the plants within the target structure from growing beyond their current size and shape. (See the new spell, earlier.)

(Effect: Base 4, +1 Touch,+2 Sun, +3 Structure, +3 Size; +1 lvls for 2 uses a day, +3 lvls for Environmental Trigger (sunrise/ sunset))

<span id="fresh-air-vines"></span>
=== ''Fresh Air Vines'' ===

These vines snake their way all around the covenant, and their blooms provide a continual fresh breeze of air to every room, balcony, and even around the trunks and branches, making the leaves continuously sway. The Ring of Ever Bloom and Circle of Growth that surround the covenant affect the vines as well, keeping them healthy and forever in bloom.

Vis spent to open: 10

<span id="chamber-of-spring-breezes"></span>
=== '''Chamber of Spring Breezes''' ===

Enchanted Item 4 pawns of Auram vis, 4 Seasons spent to invest.

CrAu 39

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Structure

Creates a breeze of fresh air that continually moves throughout a covenant, keeping the air continuously breathable even if the room is airtight.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +3 Structure, +3 size; +1 lvl 2 uses a Day, +3 lvls environmental trigger [sunrise/sunset])

<span id="gigantic-growth-1"></span>
==== '''Gigantic Growth''' ====

Enchanted Item, 3 pawns of Herbam vis, 1 Season spent to invest

MuHe 29

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Personal, D: Sun, T: Individual

As the new spell (see earlier), but with a constant effect so that the vines do not shrink.

(Base 3, +2 Sun, +1 Unnatural, +3 Size, +1 lvl 2 uses a day, +3 lvls environmental trigger [sunrise/sunset])

<span id="water-vines"></span>
=== ''Water Vines'' ===

These vines also snake their way throughout the entire covenant, providing fresh water from a nearby stream to all the different rooms of the covenant.

Vis spent to open: 12

<span id="move-water"></span>
=== '''Move Water''' ===

Enchanted Item, 3 pawns of Aquam vis, 1 Season spent to invest

ReAq 23

Pen +0, unlimited uses

R: Touch, D: Diameter, T: Individual

A person has only to take hold of one of the buds along the spell's vines and give the mental command, and a small steady stream of water pours out of the buds for a total of two minutes.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +1 Diameter, +3 Size; +10 lvls unlimited uses a day, +3 lvls Linked Trigger)

<span id="read-surface-thoughts"></span>
==== '''Read Surface Thoughts''' ====

InMe 34

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Concentration, T: Individual

This effect reads the surface thoughts of all those touching the buds.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun; +1 lvl 2/ day, +3 lvls environmental trigger (sunrise/ sunset))

<span id="gigantic-growth-2"></span>
==== '''Gigantic Growth''' ====

As the new enchanted item effect described for Fresh Air Vines.

<span id="wall-of-iron-thorns"></span>
=== ''Wall of Iron Thorns'' ===

A great wall of blackberry bushes, which is actually all just one very big single bush, that is approximately 1 pace deep and 4 paces high and completely encircles the external perimeter of the covenant. The bush itself is iron-hard and razor-sharp, and acts as very effective protective barrier for keeping intruders out of the covenant.

Vis invested to open: 12

<span id="plants-of-iron"></span>
==== '''Plants of Iron''' ====

Invested 4 Herbam vis, took 1 Season to enchant

MuHe(Te) 34

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Personal, D: Sun, T: Individual

This effect makes the plant's trunk and branches as strong and hard as iron.

(Effect: Base 4, +2 Sun, +3 Size, +1 Terram Requisite; +1 lvl for 2 uses a day, +3 lvls for environmental trigger (sunrise/sunset)

<span id="single-root-system"></span>
=== '''Single Root System''' ===

MuHe 34

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual

The plant grows large, but in an altered way. Its roots snake out through the dirt and shoot up many stalks that create apparently separate individual plants growing about an area. Although it may appear that there are many plants about, there in fact is just one single plant connected through a network of roots.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +3 Size; +1 lvl 2 uses a day, +3 lvls environmental trigger)

<span id="sun-ivy"></span>
=== ''Sun Ivy'' ===

The glowing leaves of this ivy snake their way through the covenant, providing light as bright as the day for the magi to read and work by.

Vis invested: 12

<span id="conjured-daylight"></span>
==== '''Conjured Daylight''' ====

CrIg 54

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Structure

The leaves of this ivy glow brightly and together they provide light as bright as day.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +3 Size; +1 lvls 2 uses a day, +3 lvls environmental trigger)

<span id="single-root-system-1"></span>
==== '''Single Root System''' ====

As the enchanted item effect described for Wall of Iron Thorns.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-23"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="storm-tree"></span>
=== ''Storm Tree'' ===

The Storm Tree helps to protect Gwidion's forest from drought and potential forest fires.

<span id="summon-heavy-rain"></span>
=== '''Summon Heavy Rain''' ===

ReAu 43

Pen +0, 1/day

R: Sight, D: Sun, T: Group

The spell gathers clouds and causes a heavy rain to pour down over an area of approximately one mile in diameter. The rain lasts for one day.

(Base 4, +2 Sight, +2 Sun, +2 Group, +2 size; +3 lvls linked trigger)

<span id="know-when-tree-is-dry"></span>
==== '''Know When Tree Is Dry''' ====

InHe 8

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual

This effect can tell when the plant is in need of water.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun; +1 lvl 2 uses a day, +3 lvls environmental trigger)

<span id="poppy-beds"></span>
=== ''Poppy Beds'' ===

These beds of poppies make the ground soft for the grogs and magi to sleep upon. They grow in special beds inside the covenant.

Vis spent to open: 12

<span id="soften-earth-and-plants"></span>
=== '''Soften Earth and Plants''' ===

MuTe(He) 29

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

This effect makes the earth and hard wooden floors of the tree fortress soft and perfect for sleeping upon.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part, +1 Herbam Requisite; +1 lvl 2 uses a day, +3 lvls environmental trigger)

<span id="single-root-system-2"></span>
==== '''Single Root System''' ====

As the enchanted item effect described for Wall of Iron Thorns.

<span id="the-boiling-bush"></span>
=== ''The Boiling Bush'' ===

The blooms of this rose bush snake through the covenant and have a special presence in the kitchen and bathing areas. The instant the red blooms of these roses touch water, it starts to boil. The effect continues until the water is actually boiling, which typically takes around a minute.

Vis invested to open: 12

<span id="boil-water-1"></span>
=== '''Boil Water''' ===

CrIg 25

Pen +0, unlimited uses

R: Touch, D: Concentration, T: Individual The blooms boil all water that touches them, up to an amount equal to a large bathing tub.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Concentration, +5 lvls item maintains concentration, +10 lvls unlimited uses per day)

<span id="single-root-system-3"></span>
==== '''Single Root System''' ====

As the enchanted item effect described for Wall of Iron Thorns.

<span id="bath-of-the-yellow-roses"></span>
=== ''Bath of the Yellow Roses'' ===

These yellow roses snake throughout the covenant, but are pruned especially to bloom in the bathing areas; the Water Vines are placed above the blooms, so that when they are activated the water will fall down across the blooms and become instantly warmed and perfect for bathing.

Vis invested to open: 12

<span id="warm-water"></span>
==== '''Warm Water''' ====

CrIg 19

Pen +0, unlimited uses

R: +1 Touch, D: Concentration, T: Individual The blooms warm all water that touches them, up to an amount equal to a large bathing tub.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Concentration; +5 lvls item maintains concentration, +10 lvls unlimited uses per day)

<span id="single-root-system-4"></span>
=== '''Single Root System''' ===

As the enchanted item effect described for Wall of Iron Thorns.

<span id="tree-hive"></span>
=== ''Tree Hive'' ===

This hive of honey bees is used to pollinate and in many ways protect the covenant's farm lands. The Tree Hive itself can hold up to 2,000 bees with the king. (The average normal honey bee hive has between 200 to 500 bees)

Vis used to open: 10

<span id="living-hive"></span>
=== '''Living Hive''' ===

ReHe 44

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Personal (the Tree only), D: Sun, T: Individual

This effect keeps the tree from growing beyond its original design and thereby invalidating the enchantments already put upon it.

(Effect: Base 4, +2 Sun, +3 Elaborate, +3 Size, +1 lvl for 2 uses a day, +3 lvls for environmental trigger (sunrise/sunset))

<span id="friendly-bees"></span>
==== '''Friendly Bees''' ====

ReAn 39

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group

This spell makes every bee in the hive passive for a day. This means that the grogs can work the gardens and harvest the honey, and as long as no one attacks the hive, the bees will not sting.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Group; +1lvls 2 uses a day, +3lvls Environmental Trigger (sunrise/sunset))

<span id="ring-of-mixed-compost"></span>
=== ''Ring of Mixed Compost'' ===

Waste removal in the covenant involves a combination of three enchantments. The first was to design the covenant so that every bed chamber had its own private privy, with a long shaft that leads down into a room on the ground floor. The shafts are

<span id="magi-of-hermes-24"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

kept clean by the water vines; every time a grog or magus uses his privy, he just activates the vines and water rushes down the shaft, carrying the waste with it to the bottom chamber. The liquid is then reabsorbed into the earth and tree, while the

<span id="enchanting-giant-plants"></span>
=== ''Enchanting Giant Plants'' ===

A magus cannot enchant something that does not fit in his laboratory. Gwidion can get around this with his plants by enchanting them while they are young and small, and then using magic to make them much larger once the enchantment is complete. In many cases, the magic to make the plants large is part of the enchantment. In others, it is allowed for in the initial enchantment, so that it does not count as damage to the item.

rest of the waste is dealt with by a large enchanted stone circle that surrounds the walls of the room where the waste is disposed of. The enchanted ring has a constant effect upon it, which lets it continue to mix the dirt, waste, and plant matter over and over again throughout the night. Nature takes its course, and within a few weeks to a month the room is full of natural fertilizer. Grogs are then sent down there every now and then to add fresh dirt or remove some of the compost for use or trade with the surrounding farms.

Vis spent to open: 16

<span id="mixed-compost"></span>
==== '''Mixed Compost''' ====

ReTe(Co,He) 33

Pen +0, 1/day

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Circle

This effect to mixes the dirt, waste, and plant material at night until it becomes natural compost. The compost is then removed during the day and fresh dirt is added.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Circle, +1 Corpus Requisite, +1 Herbam Requisite, +3 lvls environmental trigger (sunset).)

<span id="rings-of-basketed-transport"></span>
=== ''Rings of Basketed Transport'' ===

There are four rings in the forest used to transport people and supplies. The enchantments actually affect larger-than-life baskets, big enough and strong enough to hold up to thirty people comfortably. When the rings move a basket, they take the people, animals, and whatever else is inside the basket along.

The first one is right at the base of the covenant and it transports people and things up to one of the balconies. The second is on an adjacent balcony and it is used to transport people and things back down to the ground. This (outside of climbing) is the only way in or out of the covenant.

The second set of rings is located at two different places, one near the covenant tree (but not right next to it) and the other located outside the large Iron Blackberry bush. Both of these rings are elevated atop a large circular stone pedestal that is conveniently higher then the blackberry bush. The pedestals both have ramps built into them to allow for carts to be pulled upward to the baskets for loading and unloading of supplies, and staircases are installed on the opposite side for foot traffic. One ring is designed to transport people out of the covenant's private forest, and the other transports people back in. These two rings require two separate mental commands, while the rings at the covenant tree only require that person to think &quot;up&quot; or &quot;down.&quot; The baskets were woven by Gwidion himself using magic.

Vis spent to open: 12

<span id="move-gigantic-wicker-basket"></span>
==== '''Move Gigantic Wicker Basket''' ====

ReHe 48

Pen +0, unlimited uses

R: Touch, D: Momentary, T: Circle

When the right mental command is made, the enchanted ring of stones moves the gigantic wicker basket carriage 50 paces in some direction. The destination is set when the enchantment is put down.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +3 Size, +10 lvls Unlimited uses +3 lvls Linked Trigger)

<span id="read-surface-thoughts-1"></span>
==== '''Read Surface Thoughts''' ====

As the enchanted item effect described for Water Vines.

<span id="talisman-gwidions-riding-tree"></span>
= ''Talisman: Gwidion's Riding Tree'' =

In his old age, Gwidion found it more and more difficult to go outside the covenant and harvest vis, so he created his Talisman. Gwidion's Talisman is a (now) fully grown oak, but due to its various enchantments it has become severely Warped over the years, so that its branches resemble hands, its roots feet, and upon its trunk is a great gnarled face whose expression seems to change with the seasons and the moods of its creator. In his advanced years, Gwidion uses the tree to move around his forest and visit the covenant's farms and bee hives to make sure all is going well. Gwidion has even thought about expanding his tree's size and then simply building his lab right atop it, but as yet he has not gone that far with the great oak.

Vis spent to open: 10 (more vis added later, as a talisman)

'''Attunements'''

+7 Protection from Storms

<span id="evergreen-1"></span>
==== '''Evergreen''' ====

Invested 2 Herbam vis, took 1 season to enchant

CrHe 14

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Personal, D: Sun, T: Individual

This effect keeps the tree in perfect health all year round.

(Base 1, +2 Sun; +3 Size, +3 lvls environmental trigger (sunrise/sunset), +1 lvl 2/day)

<span id="plants-of-iron-1"></span>
=== '''Plants of Iron''' ===

Invested 4 Herbam vis, took 1 season to enchant

MuHe(Te) 34

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Personal, D: Sun, T: Individual

This effect makes the tree's trunk and branches as strong as iron.

(Base 4, +2 Sun, +3 Size, +1 Terram Requisite; +1 lvl for 2 uses a day, +3 lvls for environmental Trigger (sunrise/sunset)

<span id="controlled-growth-2"></span>
=== '''Controlled Growth''' ===

Invested 3 Herbam vis, took 1 season to enchant

ReHe 29

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Personal, D: Sun, T: Individual

This effect keeps the tree from growing beyond its original design and thereby invalidating the enchantments already put upon it.

(Effect: Base 4, +2 Sun; +1 lvl for 2 uses a day, +3 lvls for environmental trigger (sunrise/sunset), +3 Size)

<span id="the-movements-of-a-man"></span>
=== '''The Movements of a Man''' ===

Invested 5 Herbam vis, took 1 season to enchant

ReHe 48

Pen 0, unlimited uses

R: Personal, D: Sun, T: Individual

This spell is a more complicated version of the spell ''Lord of the Trees'' ('''ArM5''', page 139); it in effect allows Gwidion to move his tree's trunk, branches, and leaves as if it were an extension of his own body.

(Base 10, +2 Sun, +10 lvls unlimited uses, +3 lvls for linked trigger, +3 Size)

<span id="read-surface-thoughts-2"></span>
=== '''Read Surface Thoughts''' ===

Invested 3 Intellego vis, took 1 season to enchant

InMe 34

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Concentration, T: Individual

This effect reads the surface thoughts of all those touching the tree.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun; +1 lvl 2/ day, +3 lvls environmental trigger (sunrise/ sunset))

<span id="ward-against-heat-and-flames"></span>
=== '''Ward Against Heat and Flames''' ===

Invested 3 Ignem vis, took 6 seasons to enchant

ReIg: 54

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group

Keeps heat and fire at bay, unable to approach within one pace of the tree or those riding atop it, rendering them all immune to damage from flames or heat of intensity less than that of molten iron. The target gets a +15 Soak against all fire-related damage. Any fire doing less than +15 damage per round doesn't penetrate the ward. Such fires simply dim as the tree lumbers past and flare back up after it is gone.

(Base 4, +2 for up to +15 damage, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Group, +1 lvl for 2 uses a day, +3 lvls for environmental trigger (sunrise/sunset), +3 Size)

<span id="chapter-five"></span>
=== ''Chapter Five'' ===

<span id="hugh-of-flambeau"></span>
= ''Hugh of Flambeau'' =

'''Concept:''' A magus who relishes physical combat, and who has developed many spells and enchanted items to make him a more formidable opponent.

Hugh Hostis of Flambeau was late to begin his apprenticeship; he was already fourteen years old when his master discovered him on the streets of the city, being used as a heavy by a local street gang, intimidating people with his Gift. The magus of House Flambeau took the boy in, and after taming him, taught him magic. Hugh was trained in the School of Ramius, a Flambeau style of combat that emphasizes mundane attacks and magical defenses, and he spent nearly as much time drilling in combat with the grogs as he did in the laboratory. He has become an excellent soldier, easily the match of many experienced grogs especially as a brawler, but has been struck around the head so many times that he has permanently damaged his hearing.

Hugh has a natural talent for combining magic and combat. His mother told him that the blood of the valkyries — supernatural warrior women of the Northern lands — flowed in his veins, and that they provide him with armor whenever he needs it. Hugh never holds back in combat; he is always with the warriors in the front line, sometimes acting as leader and/or vanguard of the fighting force. Since his Mythic Blood rarely leaves him fatigued, he often casts defensive spells on his fellow soldiers to make them better warriors. The grogs respect his fighting ability but fear his recklessness and his temper. His favored tactic is to strike a supernatural target in battle with a weapon then follow up with a spell, using the blood on the blade as an Arcane Connection to enhance Penetration.

After nearly a half-century of service, Hugh has become a prominent member of the tribunal, taking it upon himself to hunt down Marched magi with a group of loyal grogs and impose the punishment of the Order. Two decades after his apprenticeship Hugh came to the attention of the Legion of Mithras (see ''The Mysteries, Revised Edition'', pages 118–122), a Mystery cult devoted to the defense of the Order from outside threats. He was initiated and has achieved the second rank, called the Bride. He has made excursions beyond the bounds of the Order's territories to investigate rumors of hostile magicians, and slain several hedge wizards as a consequence. He personally does not feel that any of the magicians he has faced posed a serious threat to the Order, but he is a loyal soldier and does what he is told.

<span id="hugh-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Hugh at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per –2, Pre –1, Com 0, Str +2, Sta +3, Dex +1, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 29 (29) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0 (0) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Mythic Blood (valkyrie); Affinity with Rego, Minor Magical Focus** (arms and armor), Puissant Great Weapon, Puissant Perdo*, Rapid Convalescence, Skilled Parens, Special Circumstances (in

melee combat), Tough, Warrior; Magic Addiction, Ambitious, Short-Ranged

\* House Virtue

\** from Mythic Blood

'''Personality Traits:''' Recklessly Brave +3, Argumentative +2, Belligerent +2

Magic; Poor Hearing, Reckless**

<span id="combat-3"></span>
==== '''Combat:''' ====

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack +6, Defense +4, Damage +2 ''Pole Axe:'' Init 0, Attack +14, Defense +7, Damage +13

'''Soak:''' 13 (in armor, +3 after casting ''Doublet of Impenetrable Silk'')

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (copying), Athletics 1 (in armor), Awareness 2 (at night), Brawl 4 (punch), Code of Hermes 1 (high crimes), Concentration 2 (in battle), Criminal Lore 1 (local town), Finesse 2 (Rego), Great Weapon 5+2 (pole axe), Latin 4 (shouting), Leadership 2 (soldiers), Magic Theory 4 (Rego effects), Native Language 5 (criminal argot), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (House Flambeau), Parma Magica 1 (Corpus), Penetration 2 (Corpus), Ride 2 (in battle)

'''Arts: Cr''' 3**, In** 1**, Mu** 4**, Pe** 6+3**, Re** 12**; An** 2**, Aq** 1**, Au** 1**, Co** 6**, He** 4**, Ig** 0**, Im** 0**, Me** 2**, Te** 5**, Vi** 6

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' pole axe, 2 throwing axes

'''Encumbrance:''' –1 (Load 9, Burden 3)

<span id="powers-4"></span>
==== '''Powers''' ====

''Gird the Warrior'', 0 points, Init +0, Terram: By uttering a few words and sweeping his hands down his body, Hugh can convert any clothes that he is wearing into a suit of full metal scale armor, providing 7 points of Protection and 7 points of Load. The armor remains until Hugh decides to dismiss it (MuAn (He, Te) 30; R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Group; base 5, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Group; +5 maintains concentration)

<span id="spells-known-1"></span>
==== '''Spells Known:''' ====

''Doublet of Impenetrable Silk'' (MuAn 15/+11 <sup>F</sup> ) ''Blunt the Viper's Fangs'' (PeAn 15/+7 S ) ''Circle of Beast Warding'' (ReAn 5/+17) ''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+12)

''Dust to Dust'' (PeCo 15/+9 S )

''Rise of the Feathery Body'' (ReCo 10/+21)

''Endurance of the Berserkers'' (ReCo 15/+21) ''Curse of Rotting Wood'' (PeHe 5/+16)

''Repel the Wooden Shaft'' (ReHe 10/+12 FS)

''Aura of Ennobled Presence'' (MuIm 10/+7) ''Edge of the Razor'' (MuTe 20/+17 F ) Mastery 1 (Penetration)

''Magi of Hermes''

''Maintaining the Demanding Spell'' (ReVi 20/+22)

Mastery 1 (Fast Cast) F includes Magical Focus

S includes Short-Ranged Magic

'''Appearance:''' A tall, broad-shouldered man with a heavy brow, squat features, and a broken nose. He is clearly in excellent physical condition. He keeps his hair short, and while he cultivates no beard or mustache he often neglects to shave for several days. One would be forgiven for confusing him with a common soldier rather than a magus of the Order.

'''Casting Sigil:''' Weapons. The sound of clashing weapons is common, as is a keen edge.

'''Voting Sigil:''' A hand axe engraved with the symbol of House Flambeau.

<span id="hugh-15-years"></span>
=== ''Hugh +15 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per –2, Pre –1, Com 0, Str +2, Sta +3, Dex +1, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 44 (37)

'''Decrepitude:''' 0

'''Warping Score:''' 3 (0)

'''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Mythic Blood (valkyrie); Affinity with Rego, Minor Magical Focus** (arms and armor), Puissant Great Weapon, Puissant Perdo*, Rapid Convalescence, Skilled Parens, Special Circumstances (in melee combat), Tough, Warrior; Magic Addiction, Ambitious, Short-Ranged Magic; Poor Hearing, Reckless**

\* House Virtue

\** from Mythic Blood

'''Personality Traits:''' Recklessly Brave +3, Argumentative +2, Belligerent +2

'''Reputation:''' Hoplite 2 (Hermetic)

<span id="combat-4"></span>
==== '''Combat:''' ====

''Tonatris (Gauntlet):'' Init 0, Attack +6, Defense +6, Damage +4

''Pole Axe:'' Init +1, Attack +14, Defense +8, Damage +13

'''Soak:''' 13 (in armor, +3 after casting ''Gift of the Bear's Fortitude'', +3 after casting ''Doublet of Impenetrable Silk'')

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (copying), Athletics 2 (in armor), Awareness 2 (at night), Brawl 4 (punch), Code of Hermes 1 (high crimes), Concentration 2 (in battle), Criminal Lore 1 (local town), Finesse 2 (Rego), Great Weapon 5+2 (pole axe), Latin 4 (shouting), Leadership 2 (soldiers), Magic Theory 5 (1) (Rego effects), Native Language 5 (criminal argot), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (House Flambeau), Parma Magica 4 (Corpus), Penetration 4 (Corpus), Ride 2 (in battle)

'''Arts: Cr''' 5**, In** 4**, Mu** 6**, Pe** 9+3**, Re** 14**; An** 5**, Aq** 1**, Au** 1**, Co** 10**, He** 6**, Ig** 3**, Im** 3**, Me** 6**, Te** 8**, Vi** 8

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Tonatris, pole axe

'''Encumbrance:''' –1 (Load 9, Burden 3)

<span id="powers-5"></span>
==== '''Powers''' ====

''Gird the Warrior'', 0 points, Init +0, Terram: as above

<span id="spells-known-2"></span>
==== '''Spells Known:''' ====

''Doublet of Impenetrable Silk'' (MuAn 15/+19 <sup>F</sup> )

''Blunt the Viper's Fangs'' (PeAn 15/+10 S )

''Circle of Beast Warding'' (ReAn 5/+22)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+18)

''Avalanche of Flesh and Steel'' (MuCo 10/+19)

''Assume the Stature of the Giants of Eld'' (MuCo 10/+19)

''Gift of the Bear's Fortitude'' (MuCo 25/+19)

''Dust to Dust'' (PeCo 15/+13 S )

''Rise of the Feathery Body'' (ReCo 10/+27)

''Endurance of the Berserkers'' (ReCo 15/+27)

''Curse of Rotting Wood'' (PeHe 5/+21)

''Repel the Wooden Shaft'' (ReHe 10/+15 FS)

''Aura of Ennobled Presence'' (MuIm 10/+12)

''Breaking the Captain's Baton'' (PeMe 10/+11 S )

''Edge of the Razor'' (MuTe 20/+24 F ) Mastery 1 (Penetration)

''The Wizard's Parry'' (ReTe 5/+34 F ) Mastery 1 (Fast-Cast)

''The Instant Ring Fort'' (ReTe 15/+25)

''Circular Wall of Shields'' (ReTe 30/+33 F

''Maintaining the Demanding Spell'' (ReVi 20/+26)

)

Mastery 1 (Fast Cast) F includes Magical Focus

S includes Short-Ranged Magic

'''Appearance:''' A tall, broad-shouldered man with a heavy brow, squat features, and a broken nose. He is clearly in excellent physical condition. He keeps his hair short, and while he cultivates no beard or mustache he often neglects to shave for several days. One would be forgiven for confusing him with a common soldier rather than a magus of the Order.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' Hugh has spent four seasons creating a magical gauntlet (one season to prepare the item, and three seasons to invest ''Night-Time Thunder''). He has spent a season creating his longevity ritual. In the last 15 years Hugh has also invented 105 levels of spells, and gained 194 experience points in Arts and 121 experience points in Abilities.

<span id="rugh-30-years"></span>
=== Rugh +30 years ===

Characteristics: Int +1, Per -2, Pre -1, Com 0, Str +2, Sta +3, Dex +1, Qik 0

Size: 0 Age: 59 (46) Decrepitude: 0 (0) Warping Score: 4 (10) Confidence Score: 2 (6)

Virtues and Flaws: The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Mythic Blood (valkyrie); Affinity with Rego, Minor Magical Focus** (arms and armor), Puissant Brawl, Puissant Perdo*, Rapid Convalescence, Skilled Parens, Special Circumstances (in melee combat), Strong Willed², Tough, True Friend¹, Warrior; Magic Addiction, Ambitious, Short-Ranged Magic; Dutybound², Poor Hearing, Reckless**

\* House Virtue

\** from Mythic Blood

1 from Familiar

<sup>2</sup> from Initiation in the Legion of Mithras

Personality Traits: Loyal to Bathild +3, Recklessly Brave +3, Argumentative +2, Belligerent +2

<math display="inline">\textbf{Reputation} \hbox{: Hoplite 3 (Hermetic)}</math>

Combat:

Tonatris (Gauntlet): Init 0, Attack +6, Defense +6, Damage +4

Troll's Wife (Pole Axe): Init +1, Attack +18, Defense +12, Damage +13

Troll's Wife (from borseback): Init +1, Attack +21, Defense +15, Damage +13

Soak: 16 (in armor, includes Bronze Cord; additional +3 after casting Gift of the Bear's Fortitude, additional +3 after casting Doublet of Impenetrable Silk)

Fatigue Levels: OK, 0, -1, -3, -5, Unconscious

Wound Penalties: -1 (1-5), -3 (6-10), -5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

Abilities: Artes Liberales 2 (copying), Athletics 2 (in armor), Awareness 2 (at night), Brawl 4 (punch), Code of Hermes 1 (high crimes), Concentration 2 (in battle), Criminal Lore 1 (local town), Finesse 2 (Rego), Great Weapon 6+2 (pole axe), Latin 4 (shouting), Leadership 3 (soldiers), Magic Theory 6 (Rego effects), Legion of Mithras Lore 1 (initiation), Native Language 5 (criminal argot), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (House Flambeau), Parma Magica 5 (Corpus), Penetration 5 (Corpus), Ride 2 (in battle), Teaching 1 (Arts)

Arts: Cr 5, In 5, Mu 6, Pe 10+3 (8), Re 15; An 7, Aq 5, Au 5, Co 10, He 5, Ig 5, Im 5, Me 5, Te 8, Vi 11

Twilight Scars: none

<span id="pamiliar-bathild-the-magical-horse"></span>
=== Pamiliar: Bathild the Magical Horse ===

Magic Might: 8 (Animal)

Characteristics: Int -3, Per +1, Pre 0, Com -4, Str +4, Sta +3, Dex -1, Qik +2

Size: +2

Season: Summer Confidence: 2 (6)

Virtues and Flaws: Magic Animal; Magical Friend; Improved Characteristics x 2, Long-Winded, True Friend*; Proud from Familiar bond

Magic Qualities and Inferiorities: Greater Power (Beast and Rider As One), Improved Attack, Improved Confidence, Improved Initiative, Improved Soak, Minor Virtue: Wilderness Sense

Personality Traits: Loyal to Hugh +3, Vain +3, Brave +2, Chatty +1

Combat:

''Kick'': Init +7, Attack +8, Defense +9, Damage +5

oak: +5

Wound Penalties: -1 (1-7), -3 (8-14), -5 (16-21), Incapacitated (22-28), Dead (29+)

Fatigue Levels: OK, 0/0, -1/-1, -3, -5, Unconscious

Abilities: Athletics 4 (long distance running), Awareness 3 (noises), Brawl 4 (kick), Concentration 2 (powers), Faerie Lore 2 (faerie horses), Folk Ken 3 (soldiers), Local Area Lore 3 (roads), Magic Lore 3 (vis sources), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (House Flambeau), Leadership 3 (other horses), Swim 2 (fording rivers), Wilderness Sense 4 (forests)

Powers:

Beast and Rider As One, 4 points, Init –2, Animal: Bathild's rider partially merges with her; his legs meld to her flesh and their minds work in concert. The rider no longer needs to concentrate on keeping his balance, and Ride rolls become unnecessary. When fighting from horse-back, the bonus to Attack and Defense rolls provided by the Ride Ability of the rider is not limited to +3. Naturally the rider can't be unhorsed, but neither can he dismount until the power ceases. MuCo(An, Me) 45; base 25, +1 Conc, +2 Group, +1 Mentem requisite): Greater Power (45 levels, –1 Might cost)

Ride of the Einherjar: Granted by the familiar bond, see main text for details.

Gird the Steed for War: Granted by the familiar bond, see main text for details.

Vis: 2 Animal, in hooves.

Appearance: a roan charger whose pelt is the color of dried blood.

Bathild claims descent from Sleipnir, the fabled horse ridden by Odin. Hugh sought out an einheri (a ghostly warrior dedicated to Odin) and bargained with him. In exchange for the horse over which the einheri was guardian, Hugh was obliged to start a war between two villages. Since this occurred deep in the territory of the hypothesized Order of Odin, he does not consider that he broke the Code of Hermes in performing this duty.

When Hugh forged the initial familiar bond with Bathild, his Rego Terram Lab Total (with the assistance of his apprentice) was 43, which was just sufficient for his purpose. He has the following Bond Scores: Gold +1, Silver +1, Bronze +3.

(Bathild was created according to the rules in ''Realms of Power: The Magic Realm'', Magical Characters)

<span id="ride-of-the-einherjar"></span>
==== RIDE OF THE EINHERJAR ====

ReAn 27 Pen n/a, 3/day R: Per, D: Conc, T: Ind

When Hugh activates this power, Bathild is able to travel through the air as easily as she would over land. Each use of the power lasts for as long as she remains airborne; as her feet touch the ground the effect ceases. The base level for this effect is assumed through analogy with the Rego Corpus guidelines. The Einherjar were Odin's warriors, chosen from the slain.

(Effect: Base 15, +1 Conc, Modifications: +2 3/day, +5 maintains concentration)

<span id="gird-the-steed-for-war"></span>
==== GIRD THE STEED FOR WAR ====

CrTe(An) 30 Pen n/a, 1/day R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

When Hugh activates this power, Bathild is clothed in metal scale barding, granting a Protection of 7. The Animal requisite is required to create the armor's leather straps, woolen padding, and gambeson — without these elements, the armor would not be effective

(Effect: base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 very elaborate shape)

'''Equipment:''' Troll's Wife talisman, Tonatris '''Encumbrance:''' –1 (Load 9, Burden 3)

'''Powers'''

Gird the Warrior, 0 points, Init +0, Terram: as above

<span id="spells-known-3"></span>
==== Spells Known: ====

Doublet of Impenetrable Silk (MuAn 15/+22 F) Blunt the Viper's Fangs (PeAn 15/+12 S) Circle of Beast Warding (ReAn 5/+25) Bind Wound (CrCo 10/+22 T) Assume the Stature of the Giants of Eld (MuCo 10/+22 T)

Avalanche of Flesh and Steel (MuCo 10/+22 <sup>T</sup>) Gift of the Bear's Fortitude (MuCo 25/+22 <sup>T</sup>) The Blessing of Starkad (MuCo 25/+22 <sup>T</sup>) Turb of Giants (MuCo 25/+22 <sup>T</sup>) Dust to Dust (PeCo 15/+15 <sup>ST</sup>) Rise of the Feathery Body (ReCo 10/+31 <sup>T</sup>) Endurance of the Berserkers (ReCo 15/+31 <sup>T</sup>) Curse of Rotting Wood (PeHe 5/+21) Repel the Wooden Shaft (ReHe 10/+14 <sup>FS</sup>) Halt the Piercing Shafts (ReHe(Te) 25/+28 <sup>F</sup>) Aura of Ennobled Presence (MuIm 10/+14) Breaking the Captain's Baton (PeMe 10/+11 <sup>S</sup>) Blunting the Iron's Bite (MuTe 10/+12 <sup>FS</sup>) Edge of the Razor (MuTe 20/+24 <sup>F</sup>) Mastery 1 (Penetration)

The Wizard's Parry (ReTe 5/+34 F) Mastery 1 (Fast-Cast)

Disarm the Warrior (ReTe 10/+17 FS)

The Instant Ring Fort (ReTe 15/+26) Circular Wall of Shields (ReTe 30/+34 F)

Maintaining the Demanding Spell (ReVi 20/+31)

Mastery 2 (Fast Cast, Imperturbable, see

Houses of Hermes: Societates, page 33–34)

F includes Magical Focus

S includes Short-Ranged Magic T includes Talisman attunement bonus

Appearance: A tall, broad-shouldered man

with a heavy brow, squat features, and a broken nose. He is clearly in excellent physical condition. He keeps his hair short, and while he cultivates no beard or mustache he often neglects to shave for several days. He has started to take on a more grizzled appearance with the accumulation of some small scars.

Activities in the last 15 years: The last fifteen years has seen Hugh acquire the three defining features of a mature magus — a familiar, a talisman, and an apprentice. He has spent one season forging the initial familiar bond, and two further seasons empowering the bond with the Ride of the Einberjar effect. His talisman Troll's Wife was prepared, attuned as a talisman, and invested with Fell the Faerie, for a total of four seasons. His apprentice has received five seasons of training. In the last 15 years Hugh has also invented 90 levels of spells, and gained 116 experience points in Arts and 154 experience points in Abilities.

<span id="hugh-45-years"></span>
=== hugh +45 years ===

Characteristics: Int +1, Per -2, Pre -1, Com 0, Str +2, Sta +3, Dex +1 (1), Qik 0

Size: 0 Age: 74 (54) Decrepitude: 0 (1) Warping Score: 5 (15) Confidence Score: 2 (6)

Virtues and Flaws: The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Mythic Blood (valkyrie); Affinity with Rego, Clear Thinker<sup>2</sup>, Minor Magical Focus** (arms and armor), Puissant

Brawl, Puissant Perdo*, Rapid Convalescence, Skilled Parens, Special Circumstances (in melee combat), Strong Willed², Tough, True Friend¹, Warrior; Magic Addiction, Ambitious, Short-Ranged Magic; Dutybound², Poor Hearing, Reckless**

* * House Virtue
* ** from Mythic Blood
* 1 from Familiar

2 from Initiation in the Legion of Mithras Personality Traits: Loyal to Bathild +3, Recklessly Brave +3, Argumentative +2, Belligerent +2

Reputation: Hoplite 3 (Hermetic) Combat:

Tonatris (Gauntlet): Init 0, Attack +6, Defense +6, Damage +4

Troll's Wife (Pole Axe): Init +1, Attack +19, Defense +13, Damage +13

Troll's Wife (from horseback): Init +1, Attack +22*, Defense +16*, Damage +13

\* If Bathild uses her ''Horse and Rider as One'' power, add one to these scores.

Soak: 16 (in armor, includes Bronze Cord, additional +3 after casting Gift of the Bear's Fortitude, additional +3 after casting Doublet of Impenetrable Silk)

Fatigue Levels: OK, 0, -1, -3, -5, Unconscious

Wound Penalties: -1 (1-5), -3 (6-10), -5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

Abilities: Artes Liberales 2 (copying), Athletics 2 (in armor), Awareness 2 (at night), Brawl 4 (punch), Code of Hermes 2 (high crimes), Concentration 3 (in battle), Criminal Lore 1 (local town), Finesse 3 (Rego), Great Weapon 7+2 (pole axe),

Latin 4 (shouting), Leadership 4 (soldiers), Legion of Mithras Lore 2 (initiation), Magic Theory 7 (Rego effects), Native Language 5 (criminal argot), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (House Flambeau), Parma Magica 5 (Corpus), Penetration 5 (Corpus), Ride 2 (in battle), Teaching 3 (Arts)

'''Arts: Cr''' 5**, In** 5**, Mu** 8**, Pe** 13+3**, Re** 17 (3)'''; An''' 7**, Aq** 5**, Au** 5**, Co** 12**, He** 7**, Ig** 5**, Im** 5**, Me** 5**, Te** 10**, Vi** 12

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Troll's Wife talisman, Tonatris '''Encumbrance:''' –1 (Load 9, Burden 3)

'''Powers'''

''Gird the Warrior'', 0 points, Init +0, Terram: as above

<span id="spells-known-4"></span>
==== '''Spells Known:''' ====

''Doublet of Impenetrable Silk'' (MuAn 15/+25 <sup>F</sup> ) ''Blunt the Viper's Fangs'' (PeAn 15/+13 S ) ''Circle of Beast Warding'' (ReAn 5/+27) ''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+24T)

''Assume the Stature of the Giants of Eld'' (MuCo 10/+26 T)

''Avalanche of Flesh and Steel'' (MuCo 10/+26 T) ''Gift of the Bear's Fortitude'' (MuCo 25/+26 T)

''The Blessing of Starkad'' (MuCo 25/+26 T)

''Turb of Giants'' (MuCo 25/+26 T) ''Dust to Dust'' (PeCo 15/+16 ST)

''Rise of the Feathery Body'' (ReCo 10/+35 T)

''Endurance of the Berserkers'' (ReCo 15/+35 T)

''Curse of Rotting Wood'' (PeHe 5/+26)

''Repel the Wooden Shaft'' (ReHe 10/+17 FS)

''Halt the Piercing Shafts'' (ReHe(Te) 25/+27 F

''Aura of Ennobled Presence'' (MuIm 10/+16) ''Breaking the Captain's Baton'' (PeMe 10/+24 S

''Blunting the Iron's Bite'' (MuTe 10/+15 FS)

''Edge of the Razor'' (MuTe 20/+30 F ) Mastery 1 (Penetration)

''The Wizard's Parry'' (ReTe 5/+40 F ) Mastery 1 (Fast-Cast)

''Disarm the Warrior'' (ReTe 10/+20 FS)

''The Instant Ring Fort'' (ReTe 15/+30)

''Circular Wall of Shields'' (ReTe 30/+40 F )

''Maintaining the Demanding Spell'' (ReVi 20/+34) Mastery 2 (Fast-Cast, Imperturbable, see

''Houses of Hermes: Societates'', page 33–34) <sup>F</sup> includes Magical Focus <sup>S</sup> includes Short-Ranged Magic <sup>T</sup> includes Talisman attunement bonus

'''Appearance:''' A tall, broad-shouldered man with a heavy brow, squat features, and a broken nose. He is clearly in excellent physical condition. He keeps his graying hair short, and while he cultivates no beard or mustache he often neglects to shave for several days. He has the appearance of a grizzled veteran, with several scars.

'''Activities in the last 15 years''': Hugh spent four seasons improving his talisman with

<span id="magi-of-hermes-25"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

three further effects. The familiar bond to Bathild was empowered with a second effect taking four season, Hugh's apprentice received his remaining 10 seasons of training and has become a magus in his own right. In the last 15 years Hugh gained 135 experience points in Arts and 165 experience points in Abilities.

<span id="new-spells-3"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Hugh has developed the new spells that are listed here.

<span id="corpus-1"></span>
=== ''Corpus'' ===

<span id="assume-the-stature-of-the-giants-of-eld"></span>
==== '''Assume the Stature of the Giants of Eld''' ====

MuCo 10

)

)

R: Per, D: Diam, T: Ind

Adds +3 to the caster's normal Size, turning him into a veritable giant. The caster's clothing, armor, and weapons are also increased in size in proportion. Characteristics are not affected by the size change, but the caster's wound ranges change accordingly: at Size +3, the caster's wounds have eight-point increments (1–8 points for a Light Wound, 9–16 for a Medium Wound, and so forth). Casting requisites of Animal, Herbam, and Terram are usually required to affect all the target's equipment. A size modifier is required for this spell since the final size is ten times the mass of a base target for Corpus.

(Base 3, +1 Diam, +1 size, +1 to increase equipment as well)

<span id="avalanche-of-flesh-and-steel"></span>
==== '''Avalanche of Flesh and Steel''' ====

MuCo 10

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Group

Up to ten men of Size +1 become capable of running as fast as a horse. Hugh uses this specifically on a group of warriors, and maintains concentration only long enough for them to charge their foes. This gives them a bonus to their first Attack Total equal to their Athletics Ability, up to a maximum of +3.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Group)

<span id="new-guideline-muco-5"></span>
=== ''New Guideline: MuCo 5'' ===

Add or remove human body parts from the target in such a way that he no longer looks human. These parts are normally functional, although a spell may be deliberately designed so that they are not. The Target is Part, not Individual (although Group and higher Targets work as normal).

<span id="the-blessing-of-starkad"></span>
=== '''The Blessing of Starkad''' ===

MuCo 25

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

The target grows two more arms. These extra manipulators enhance certain Dexterity tasks such as climbing, and Strength rolls representing the extra muscle power available to the target, such as forcing open doors. In these situations the target receives a +3 bonus to his total. Additionally, the target can wield an additional set of weapons in combat. He can now manage either two single weapons and two shields, or a Great weapon and a shield. If fighting singly, the character makes two attacks per round, one with each set of weapons. If fighting as a group, consider the group to have an extra member, who does not count against the Leadership Ability of the group leader, if any. This extra member is excluded when determining the damage taken by the group. Casting requisites are necessary to adjust the targets in an appropriate manner, else clothing rips and armor hampers the use of the new limbs. Starkad Aludreng was a hero descended from the Norse giants; he possessed eight arms and fought with four swords.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

<span id="turb-of-giants"></span>
==== '''Turb of Giants''' ====

MuCo 25

R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Group

Adds +3 to the Size of a standard group of men. The targets' clothing, armor, and weapons are also increased in size in proportion. This has no impact on their characteristics, but increases their wound ranges accordingly. Ten individuals up to Size +1 can be affected, and at Size +3, their wounds have eight-point increments (1–8 points for a Light Wound, 9–16 for a Medium Wound, and so forth). Casting requisites of Animal,

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Diam, +2 Group, +1 size, +1 to increase equipment as well)

<span id="herbam"></span>
=== ''Herbam'' ===

<span id="halt-the-piercing-shafts"></span>
=== '''Halt the Piercing Shafts''' ===

ReHe(Te) 25

R: Per, D: Diam, T: Ind

This ward prevents any ranged weapons made of wood and/or metal from harming the caster. Missiles simply drop to the ground at his feet.

(Base 15, +1 Diam, +1 Terram requisite)

<span id="mentem"></span>
=== ''Mentem'' ===

<span id="breaking-the-captains-baton"></span>
==== '''Breaking the Captain's Baton''' ====

PeMe 10

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

The target ceases to be able to coordinate a squad of soldiers as a Trained Group. The memories required to use that skill are removed and do not return when the spell ends, but can be regained with simple demonstration and practice, requiring time but not experience. The target is aware that he has forgotten how to lead warriors in battle. Unless another member of the group is able to take over as leader, the squad fights as an Untrained Group instead. This is a less efficient version of ''Dissolving the Wall of Shields'' (''Houses of Hermes: Societates'', page 70) since it targets only the current leader rather than the entire squad.

(Base 4, +2 Voice)

<span id="terram"></span>
=== ''Terram'' ===

<span id="blunting-the-irons-bite"></span>
==== '''Blunting the Iron's Bite''' ====

MuTe 10

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Ind

Cast against any bladed weapon, this spell warps and blunts the blade hopelessly.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-26"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

The affected weapon has its total damage (including Attack Advantage) reduced to half (round up). The weapons return to their undamaged state once the Duration expires. While this could be invented as a Perdo Terram spell, Hugh prefers this version since it has the additional effect of making the affected weapons blocked by Magic Resistance. Hugh often casts this spell forcelessly, against the most dangerous-looking of his foes.

(Base 1, +2 Voice, +1 Diam, +2 affect metal)

<span id="the-wizards-parry"></span>
=== '''The Wizard's Parry''' ===

ReTe 5

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

The caster deflects one blow from a melee weapon of which he is aware. Since the magus actually touches the weapon, any additional effects of the blade — for example, a coating of poison, or a ''Blade of Virulent Flame'' still affect him. A casting requisite of Herbam is needed if the weapon is primarily wooden, such as a spear or staff. Hugh has mastered this spell, and uses it as a fast-cast defense.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 affect metal)

<span id="disarm-the-warrior"></span>
=== '''Disarm the Warrior''' ===

ReTe 10

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Causes a single object within range to fly towards Hugh; he may attempt to catch it if he wishes by succeeding on a Dexterity + Athletics roll against an Ease Factor of 9. If he chooses not to attempt to catch the item, it falls to the ground by his feet. The spell is very forceful, and has an equivalent Strength of +5; if the object is being held by someone else, then make an opposed Strength roll. If the caster rolls higher then the item is lost to its holder. Hugh usually uses this effect to disarm his opponents, or to retrieve his weapons should they not be to hand.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 sudden and forceful)

<span id="the-instant-ring-fort"></span>
==== '''The Instant Ring Fort''' ====

ReTe 15

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Part

Earth and stone is excavated from a circular ditch around the caster to create a circle of packed earth and rock four paces in diameter, two paces thick, and eight feet high. The spell does not break stone, so any boulders that extend beyond the target are left in place. The ring fort provides an excellent defensive position for holding off a superior enemy, or providing cover for or from archers.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Part, +1 Size, +1 affect stone)

<span id="circular-wall-of-shields"></span>
=== '''Circular Wall of Shields''' ===

ReTe 30

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group

Up to twenty shields rise into the air and form a circle around the caster or anyone he designates. Up to ten people can stand within the circle, if they crowd together, but two shields are needed to give adequate defense to each person. The shields slowly rotate around the circle, providing total cover against missile weapons, and limited cover against melee attacks. The shields provide a Defense Total against melee attacks equal to the caster's Perception + Finesse plus the Defense modifier of the shield in question. If a shield successfully defends against an attack, the base weapon damage is still inflicted directly on the shield. Each shield has a Soak of 3, and if it takes more than 10 points of damage in a single blow, the shield is destroyed and drops to the ground. Destroying shields leaves some individuals in the ring unprotected; but because the shields move, the undefended individuals change each round. If a person is protected by just one shield, then apply the Defense Total to missile attacks as well as melee attacks. From inside the ring, the shields can be plucked from the air; but once this is done, they cannot be replaced.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Group, +2 affect metal)

<span id="enchanted-items-3"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Hugh has created the gauntlet Tonatris, as described below.

<span id="tonatris"></span>
=== ''Tonatris'' ===

This enchanted gauntlet is shaped like the caestus used by a gladiator in Roman times; a tough leather glove buckled around the wrist, but with no fingers. The leather is

plated with iron, particularly over the knuckles where it forms spikes and heavy plates. The gauntlet was opened with 10 pawns of vis (a small item of base metal), and currently has five pawns-worth of effects.

<span id="night-time-thunder"></span>
==== '''Night-Time Thunder''' ====

ReMe 20

Pen +12, 12/day

R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Ind

This effect is triggered when the wearer of the gauntlet strikes a being with his thumb between his ring and little fingers. The target falls asleep, and cannot be naturally awakened until the effect's duration has expired.

(Effect: Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Diam; Modifications +4 12/day, +6 Penetration)

<span id="vaulting-lightning"></span>
==== '''Vaulting Lightning''' ====

ReCo 30

Pen +12, 12/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This effect is triggered when the wearer of the gauntlet strikes a being with his thumb between his middle and ring fingers. The target is propelled backwards with incredible force, traveling up to 5 paces. Upon landing, the target suffers +8 damage. The damage is doubled if the target strikes a hard object such as a wall before the range of 5 paces is reached, or if the target lands on a hard surface such as flagstones.

(Effect: Base 15, +1 Touch; Modifications +4 12/day, +6 Penetration)

<span id="talisman-trolls-wife"></span>
= ''Talisman: Troll's Wife'' =

Hugh has enchanted a long-hafted bearded axe as his talisman. He calls this Troll's Wife, in deference to a Northern tradition to name an axe after a fearsome monster. Only the

<span id="magi-of-hermes-27"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

haft has been enchanted, allowing the blade to be unimpeded by Magic Resistance. The weapon is beautifully made: the head is made of steel with an iron edge, and inlaid silver depicts mythological scenes of heroes slaying dragons and giants. The haft is made of holly wood, perfectly sized to Hugh's height and reach, and bound in bands of brass. It is carved with horses, eagles, and wolves. Near the axe head are six inlaid discs, three of amber and three of bloodstone. This weapon was made personally for Hugh at great expense, and is of excellent quality (see ''City &amp; Guild'', pages 69–70), granting a +3 to Attack and Defense rolls when using it. The weapon otherwise has the statistics of a pole axe.

Troll's Wife was opened with 12 pawns of vis (the highest cost component is the tiny semi-precious gems near the axe-head), and currently has no room left for further effects as Hugh has not chosen to increase its space just yet.

<span id="attunements"></span>
==== '''Attunements''' ====

* +3 Corpus (amber)
* +4 blood and wounds (bloodstone)
* +4 demons and angels (brass, from ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'', page 137)
* +7 harm or repel faeries (iron)

<span id="wood-that-neither-bends-nor-breaks"></span>
==== '''Wood that Neither Bends Nor Breaks''' ====

MuHe(Te) 14

Pen n/a, constant effect

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

The haft of the axe becomes as hard as iron, and is virtually unbreakable by mundane means.

(Effect: base 4, +2 Sun; Modifications +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger)

<span id="fell-the-faerie"></span>
==== '''Fell the Faerie''' ====

PeVi 23

Pen 20, 6/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This effect is triggered when the wielder of the axe says &quot;ferrum et fraxinus&quot; (&quot;iron and ash&quot;) when striking a creature with the haft; but it only affects entities with Faerie Might. If the effect penetrates, the creature loses 15 Might.

(Effect: Base 5, +1 Touch; Modifications +10 Penetration, +3 6/day)

<span id="hew-the-hell-beast"></span>
==== '''Hew the Hell-Beast''' ====

PeVi 23

Pen 20, 6/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This effect is triggered when the wielder of the axe says &quot;os et orichalcum&quot; (&quot;bone and brass&quot;) when striking a creature with the haft; but it only affects entities with Infernal Might. If the effect penetrates, the creature loses 15 Might.

(Effect: Base 5, +1 Touch; Modifications +10 Penetration, +3 6/day)

<span id="sharpening-the-wizards-blade-of-vim"></span>
== '''Sharpening the Wizard's Blade of Vim''' ==

MuVi 28

Pen n/a, 24/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This effect is automatically triggered when the wielder says the word &quot;acuere&quot; (&quot;be sharpened!&quot;) before triggering another enchantment in the talisman that has a unmodified level (that is, excluding Uses per Day, Penetration, and so forth) of 10 or less. The Penetration total of the target effect is increased by 10, which is a total change of effect. This effect can only increase the Penetration of an effect in the item, or the Penetration of the item itself.

Hugh invested this effect because when he first created many of the effects in his talisman he was unable to give them a particularly high Penetration total. This effect makes up for that deficiency, even though it adds an extra round to the activation of these effects. It is more economical in terms of enchantment costs than reinvesting the effects he has currently.

(Effect: Base 15, +1 Touch; Modifications: +5 24/day, +3 linked trigger)

<span id="chapter-six"></span>
=== ''Chapter Six'' ===

<span id="julia-of-ex-miscellanea"></span>
= ''Julia of Ex Miscellanea'' =

'''Concept:''' This weaver's faerie blood lets her produce enchanted cloth and clothing of the highest caliber, though she rejects her heritage and as a result is tormented by her fey ancestor — a spider prince.

Julia Textrix of Ex Miscellanea is a maga from the Rusticani tradition (''Houses of Hermes: Societates'', pages 130–133), magi who excel in the combination of mundane crafts and arcane magic. She was born at the covenant of Florum in the Normandy Tribunal (see ''The Lion and the Lily'', page 96), and is a member of the de Spinnen family who all bear a peculiar variety of Faerie Blood, that of a faerie spider. An encounter with her faerie ancestor at an early age left her with a deadly fear of the creature, and, by extension, all spiders. Consequently she would not be educated at Florum, and instead was apprenticed to one of the covenant's associates from whom she learned the art of magical weaving. Her faerie blood allows her to convert her own body weight of raw fibers into finished cloth every day. Her tradition-specific Virtue of Craft Magic allows her advantages to spellcasting while practicing some mundane craft; see ''Houses of Hermes: Societates'', pages 131–132 for more details. All her spells are affected by her Side Effect Virtue, in that they do not end instantly when the duration ends, but instead gradually fade away. This is barely noticeable for Momentary and Diameter Duration spells, but it takes about an hour for her Duration: Sun spells, whereas Duration: Moon and Year spells diminish over the course of a day. This fading period is also extended by her Enduring Magic; a spell that has actually lasted four Moon durations takes four days to fade away to nothing. Many of Julia's spells employ Rego Craft Magic, for more details see ''Covenants'', page 49.

Julia is somewhat of a loner, preferring not to join a covenant but instead selling the products of her magical craft to any who will buy them. Her fabulous cloth is highly sought after by the rich, for she can create miraculous colors and effects impossible with mundane dyes. She is careful not to draw too much attention to herself through this trade, working principally through a middleman who cheats her outrageously, but she doesn't mind since it keeps the Quaesitores off her back. Since her cloths are usually charged items, the magical properties fade over time, giving her a steady trade. She receives news of the families of her customers from her vendor, and is a keen follower of the social whirl from which she is forever barred due to her Gift. Instead she sometimes impregnates her fabrics with magical impulses intended to improve the lives of those who wear them.

The spider prince who is her ancestor resents her rejection of him, and sends his many-legged minions to torment her on a regular basis.

<span id="julia-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Julia at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per –2, Pre 0, Com 0, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex +3, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 26 (26) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0 (0) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Craft Magic*, Strong Faerie Blood (Spinnen); Affinity with Rego, Enduring Magic, Harnessed Magic, Lesser Immunity to Poison, Minor Magical Focus (clothing), Puissant Finesse, Second Sight**, Side Effect, Spell Foci* ; Difficult Longevity Ritual, Meddler, Supernatural Nuisance, Weak Spontaneous Magic*; Fear (spiders)

\* House Virtues and Flaw

\** free with Strong Faerie Blood

'''Personality Traits:''' Busybody +3, Industrious +2, Brave –2

'''Reputations:''' none

<span id="combat-5"></span>
==== '''Combat:''' ====

''Dodge:'' Init 0, Attack n/a, Defense 0, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (grammar), Awareness 1 (faerie trickery), Craft: Linen 3 (clothes), Craft: Wool 1 (felt), Concentration 1 (Herbam), Faerie Lore 1 (spiders), Finesse 3+2 (craft magic), Folk Ken 2 (craftsmen), Latin 4 (Hermetic), Magic Theory 4 (craft magic), Low German 5 (Flemish), Parma Magica 1 (faerie powers), Penetration 1 (Animal), Profession: Dyer 1 (reds), Second Sight 2 (faerie glamour)

'''Arts: Cr''' 7**, In** 3**, Mu** 4**, Pe** 3**, Re** 9**; An** 5**, Aq** 1**, Au** 1**, Co** 2**, He** 7**, Ig** 1**, Im** 2**, Me** 1**, Te** 1**, Vi** 3

)

'''Twilight Scars:''' none '''Equipment:''' none '''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Doublet of Impenetrable Silk'' (MuAn 15/+15 <sup>F</sup> ''Decay Fur and Hide'' (PeAn 10/+10) ''Circle of Beast Warding'' (ReAn 5/+16) ''Cloak of the Duck's Feathers'' (ReAq 5/+12) ''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+11) ''Conjure the Sturdy Vine'' (CrHe 5/+16)

''Trap of the Entwining Vines'' (CrHe 15/+16) ''Piercing Shaft of Wood'' (Mu(Re)He 10/+11) ''Curse of the Rotted Wood'' (PeHe 5/+12)

''Ward Against the Faeries of the Wood'' (ReHe 20/+18)

''Unseen Porter'' (ReTe 10/+12) ''Unraveling the Fabric of Herbam'' (PeVi 10/+8) F includes Focus

'''Appearance:''' A plain, dumpy young woman. Her back is hunched from her time over the loom, and her hands are constantly stained with dye. She dresses in functional clothes appropriate to her status as a craftswoman, in muted hues of brown, although she ties her hair back with a kerchief that is a rich blue. Her faerie heritage is evident in her hair, which is thick, black, wiry, and sparsely covers her whole body; and in her irises, which are as black as her pupils and give her an unsettling stare.

'''Sigil:''' Julia's casting sigil is a thread-like weave, while her voting sigil is an embroidered swatch of cloth.

<span id="julia-15-years"></span>
=== ''Julia +15 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per –2, Pre 0, Com 0, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex +3, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 41 (41) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 2 (13) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Craft Magic*, Strong Faerie Blood (Spinnen); Affinity with Rego, Enduring Magic, Harnessed Magic, Lesser Immunity to Poison, Minor Magical Focus (clothing), Puissant Finesse, Second Sight**, Side Effect, Spell Foci* ; Difficult Longevity Ritual, Meddler, Supernatural Nuisance, Weak Spontaneous Magic*; Fear (spiders)

\* House Virtues and Flaw

\** free with Strong Faerie Blood

'''Personality Traits:''' Busybody +3, Industrious +2, Brave –2

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init 0, Attack n/a, Defense 0, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (grammar), Awareness 1 (faerie trickery), Craft: Linen 4 (clothes), Craft: Wool 4 (felt), Concentration 2 (Herbam), Faerie Lore 1 (spiders), Finesse 4+2 (craft magic), Folk Ken 2 (craftsmen), Latin 4 (Hermetic), Magic Theory 5 (craft magic), Low German 5 (Flemish), Parma Magica 2 (faerie powers), Penetration 2 (Animal), Profession: Dyer 2 (reds), Second Sight 2 (faerie glamour)

'''Arts: Cr''' 8**, In** 4**, Mu** 7**, Pe** 3**, Re** 14**; An** 10**, Aq** 2**, Au** 1**, Co** 5**, He** 10**, Ig** 1**, Im** 3**, Me** 5**, Te** 5**, Vi** 6

'''Twilight Scars:''' her arms are permanently

<span id="magi-of-hermes-28"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

dyed blue; loose fibers spontaneously braid or knot themselves in her presence.

'''Equipment:''' none '''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Doublet of Impenetrable Silk'' (MuAn 15/+27 <sup>F</sup> Mastery 1 (Fast-Cast)

''Madder, Woad, and Weld'' (MuAn (He) 20/+26 <sup>F</sup> ) ''The Unraveled Seam'' (PeAn(He) 5/+18 <sup>F</sup> ) ''Decay Fur and Hide'' (PeAn 10/+15) ''The Wizard's Spindle'' (ReAn 4/+36 <sup>F</sup> ) ''Circle of Beast Warding'' (ReAn 5/+26) ''Dressing the Human Form in Wool'' (ReAn 15/+36 <sup>F</sup> ) ''Ward Against Faeries Which Creep and Crawl''

(ReAn 20/+27) Mastery 1 (Penetration) ''Cloak of the Duck's Feathers'' (ReAq 5/+18) ''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+15) ''Sealing the Lips'' (MuCo 10/+20) ''Conjure the Sturdy Vine'' (CrHe 5/+20) ''Clothe the Naked Form'' (CrHe 10/+28 <sup>F</sup> ) ''Trap of the Entwining Vines'' (CrHe 15/+20) ''Piercing Shaft of Wood'' (Mu(Re)He 10/+19) ''Curse of the Rotted Wood'' (PeHe 5/+15) ''The Clothier's Craft Done in an Instant'' (ReHe 4/+36 <sup>F</sup> )

''The Mended Tear'' (ReHe 5/+36 <sup>F</sup> ) ''Ward Against the Faeries of the Wood'' (ReHe 20/+26)

''Unseen Porter'' (ReTe 10/+21)

)

''Unraveling the Fabric of Herbam'' (PeVi 10/+11)

F includes Focus

'''Appearance:''' A plain, dumpy mature woman. Her back is hunched from her time over the loom, and her hands are constantly stained with dye. She has refitted her wardrobe as her trade has grown; her clients expect to see her well dressed, and she uses fabrics of her own invention, dyed to her own recipes, to demonstrate her wares. Her faerie heritage is evident in her hair, which is thick, black, wiry, and sparsely covers her whole body; and in her irises, which are as black as her pupils and give her an unsettling stare.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' Julia has invented 93 levels of spells. She has not spent any time creating magical items, since her Craft Magic allows her to duplicate simple effect in days rather than seasons. She has also acquired 197 experience points in Arts and 160 experience points in Abilities.

<span id="julia-30-years"></span>
=== Julia +30 years ===

Characteristics: Int +1, Per -2, Pre 0, Com 0, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex +3, Qik 0

Size: 0 Age: 56 (50) Decrepitude: 0 Warping Score: 3 (15) Confidence Score: 1 (3)

Virtues and Flaws: The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Craft Magic*, Strong Faerie Blood (Spinnen); Affinity with Rego, Enduring Magic, Harnessed Magic, Lesser Immunity to Poison, Minor Magical Focus (clothing), Puissant Finesse, Second Sight**, Side Effect, Spell Foci*, True Friend¹; Difficult Longevity Ritual, Meddler, Supernatural Nuisance, Weak Spontaneous Magic*; Fear (spiders)

\* House Virtues and Flaw** free with Strong Faerie Blood

<sup>1</sup> from Familiar Bond

Personality Traits: Busybody +3, Loyal to Tetrix +3, Industrious +2, Brave -2

Reputations: none

Combat:

Dodge: Init 0, Attack n/a, Defense 0, Damage n/a

Soak: +4 (includes Bronze Cord)

Fatigue Levels: OK, 0, -1, -3, -5, Unconscious

Wound Penalties: -1 (1-5), -3 (6-10), -5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

Abilities: Artes Liberales 2 (grammar), Awareness 2 (faerie trickery), Bargain 1 (prices), Craft: Linen 4 (clothes), Craft: Wool 4 (felt), Concentration 2 (Herbam), Faerie Lore 3 (spiders), Finesse 5+2 (craft magic), Folk Ken 2 (craftsmen), Latin 4 (Hermetic), Magic Theory 6 (craft magic), Low German 5 (Flemish), Parma Magica 3 (faerie powers), Penetration 2 (Animal), Profession: Dyer 2 (reds), Second Sight 3 (faerie glamour)

Arts: Cr 8, In 4, Mu 10, Pe 5, Re 15; An 12, Aq 3, Au 3, Co 8, He 10, Ig 4, Im 5, Me 7, Te 5, Vi 8 (1)

Twilight Scars: her arms are permanently dyed blue; loose fibers spontaneously braid or knot themselves in her presence; she has a perpetual musky odor.

'''Equipment:''' Forfex Princeps talisman, the Loom of the Kabouters

Encumbrance: 0 Spells Known:

Shearing the Unseen Sheep (CrAn 20/+22)

Doublet of Impenetrable Silk (MuAn 15/+35 F)

Mastery 1 (Fast-Cast)

Madder, Woad, and Weld (MuAn (He) 20/+32 F)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-29"></span>
=== Magi of hermes ===

The Unraveled Seam (PeAn(He) 5/+22 F) Decay Fur and Hide (PeAn 10/+19) The Unraveled Clothes (PeAn(He) 15/+22 F) The Wizard's Spindle (ReAn 4/+41 F) Circle of Beast Warding (ReAn 5/+29)

Dressing the Human Form in Wool (ReAn 15/+41 <sup>F</sup>) Ward Against Faeries Which Creep and Crawl (ReAn

20/+37 <sup>T)</sup> Mastery 1 (Penetration) Cloak of the Duck's Feathers (ReAq 5/+20) Bind Wound (CrCo 10/+18)

Sealing the Lips (MuCo 10/+20)

Conjure the Sturdy Vine (CrHe 5/+20)

Clothe the Naked Form (CrHe 10/+28 F)

Trap of the Entwining Vines (CrHe 15/+20) Weaver's Trap of Threads (CrHe 20/+20)

Piercing Shaft of Wood (Mu(Re)He 10/+22)

Curse of the Rotted Wood (PeHe 5/+17) The Clothier's Craft Done in an Instant (ReHe

The Mended Tear (ReHe 5/+37 F)

Tangle of Wood and Thorns (ReHe 15/+27)

The Animate Attire (ReHe <math display="inline">20/+37^{F}</math> )

Ward Against the Faeries of the Wood (ReHe 20/+34 T)

Unseen Porter (ReTe 10/+22)

Unraveling the Fabric of Herbam (PeVi 10/+15)

includes Focus

<math display="inline">4/+37^{F}</math>

T includes Talisman

Appearance: A plain, dumpy mature woman. Her back is hunched from her time over the loom, and her hands are constantly stained with dye. She has refitted her wardrobe as her trade has grown; her clients expect to see her well dressed, and she uses fabrics of her own invention, dyed to her own recipes, to demonstrate her wares. Her faerie heritage is evident in her hair, which is thick, black, wiry, and sparsely covers her whole body; and in her irises, which are as black as her pupils and give her an unsettling stare.

Activities in the last 15 years: Julia has invented 90 levels of spells. She has located and forged a bond with her familiar Tetrix, enchanted the Snap of Awakening power (2 seasons), and made her paltry Longevity Ritual (1 season) in the form of an embroidered pouch she wears around her neck (with an extra pawn of vis this gave her -4 to Aging rolls). The Loom of the Kabouters has been prepared for enchantment and had both effects instilled in it (4 seasons). She has also prepared a pair of magical shears for enchantment and attuned them as her talisman — called Forfex Princeps — and instilled the Sever Wood and Bone effect (3 seasons). During this time she started to train an apprentice who assisted in the creation of these items (2 seasons). She has also

acquired 145 experience points in Arts and 125 experience points in Abilities.

<span id="julia-45-years"></span>
=== Julia +45 years ===

Characteristics: Int +1, Per -2 (1), Pre 0, Com 0, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex +3 (1), Qik 0

Size: 0 Age: 71 (57) Decrepitude: 0 (2) Warping Score: 5 (10) Confidence Score: 1 (3)

Virtues and Flaws: The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Craft Magic*, Strong Faerie Blood (Spinnen); Affinity with Rego, Enduring Magic, Harnessed Magic, Lesser Immunity to Poison, Minor Magical Focus (clothing), Puissant Finesse, Second Sight**, Side Effect, Spell Foci*, True Friend¹, Difficult Longevity Ritual, Meddler, Supernatural Nuisance, Weak Spontaneous Magic*; Fear (spiders)

\* House Virtues and Flaw

\** free with Strong Faerie Blood

1 from Familiar Bond

Personality Traits: Busybody +3, Loyal to Tetrix +3, Industrious +2, Brave -2

Reputations: none

Combat:

Dodge: Init 0, Attack n/a, Defense 0, Damage n/a

Soak: +4 (includes Bronze Cord)

Fatigue Levels: OK, 0, -1, -3, -5, Unconscious

Wound Penalties: -1 (1-5), -3 (6-10), -5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

Abilities: Artes Liberales 2 (grammar), Awareness 2 (faerie trickery), Bargain 1 (prices), Craft: Linen 4 (clothes), Craft: Wool 5 (felt), Concentration 2 (Herbam), Faerie Lore 3 (spiders), Finesse 6+2 (craft magic), Folk Ken 2 (craftsmen), Latin 4 (Hermetic), Magic Theory 6 (craft magic), Low German 5 (Flemish), Parma Magica 4 (faerie powers), Penetration 3 (Animal), Profession: Dyer 2 (reds), Second Sight 3 (faerie glamour), Teaching 3 (crafts)

Arts: Cr 9, In 6, Mu 10, Pe 5, Re 17; An 13, Aq 5, Au 5, Co 8, He 11, Ig 5, Im 5, Me 7, Te 8, Vi 8 (1)

Twilight Scars: her arms are permanently dyed blue; loose fibers spontaneously braid or knot themselves in her presence; she has a perpetual musky odor; her canine teeth have become long and turned glossy black; she can alter the color of her eyes by simply concentrating.

'''Equipment:''' Forfex Princeps talisman, the Loom of the Kabouters, Fruit of the Loom '''Encumbrance:''' 0

Spells Known:

Shearing the Unseen Sheep (CrAn 20/+25)

Sturdy Mantle of the Traveler (CrAn 30/+34 F)

Doublet of Impenetrable Silk (MuAn 15/+36 F) Mastery 1 (Fast-Cast)

Madder, Woad, and Weld (MuAn (He) 20/+33 F)

Cloak of Nessus (MuAn 35/+35 F)

The Unraveled Seam (PeAn(He) 5/+23 F)

Decay Fur and Hide (PeAn 10/+20) The Unraveled Clothes (PeAn(He) 15/+23 F)

The Wizard's Spindle (ReAn 4/+45 F)

Circle of Beast Warding (ReAn 5/+34 T)

Dressing the Human Form in Wool (ReAn 15/+47 <math display="inline">^{\rm FT})</math>

Ward Against Faeries Which Creep and Crawl (ReAn 20/+38 T) Mastery 1 (Penetration)

Constraint of the Strangling Vestments (ReAn <math display="inline">35/+45^{\text{ F}}</math> )

Cloak of the Duck's Feathers (ReAq 5/+24)

Bind Wound (CrCo 10/+19)

Sealing the Lips (MuCo 10/+20)

Conjure the Sturdy Vine (CrHe 5/+22)

Clothe the Naked Form ( <math display="inline">CrHe\ 10/+31^{F}</math> )

Trap of the Entwining Vines (CrHe 15/+22)

The Travelers' Fortress of Cloth (CrHe 20/+22)

Weaver's Trap of Threads (CrHe 20/+22)

Piercing Shaft of Wood (Mu(Re)He 10/+23)

Curse of the Rotted Wood (PeHe 5/+29)

The Clothier's Craft Done in an Instant (ReHe 4/+43 FT)

The Mended Tear (ReHe 5/+41 F)

Tangle of Wood and Thorns (ReHe 15/+30)

The Animate Attire (ReHe 20/+41 F)

Embroidering the Wizard's Robes (ReHe 20/+41 F)

Ward Against the Faeries of the Wood (ReHe 20/+37 <math display="inline">^{\mathrm{T}}</math> )

Unseen Porter (ReTe 10/+27)

Unraveling the Fabric of Herbam (PeVi 10/+15)

F includes Focus

I includes Talisman

Appearance: A plain, dumpy mature woman. Her back is hunched from her time over the loom, and her hands are constantly stained with dye. She has refitted her wardrobe as her trade has grown; her clients expect to see her well dressed, and she uses fabrics of her own invention, dyed to her own recipes, to demonstrate her wares. Her faerie heritage is evident in her hair, which is thick, black, wiry, and sparsely covers her whole body; and in her irises, which are as black as her pupils and give her an unsettling stare.

Activities in the last 15 years: Julia has invented 5 spells in 10 seasons (now using the seasonal method to determine spell creation since her Arts are advanced). She has devoted 13 seasons to instructing her

<span id="familiar-tetrix-the-blackcock"></span>
=== Familiar: Tetrix the Blackcock ===

Season: Summer

Magic Might: 12 (Animal)

Characteristics: Int-3, Per+2, Pre-1, Com-2, Str-3, Sta+3, Dex 0, Qik+2

Size: -2

Confidence: 1 (3)

Virtues and Flaws: Magic Animal; Gossip, Student of Faerie; True Friend*; Clumsy, Non-Combatant

\* from Familiar bond

Magical Qualities: Greater Power, No Fatigue; Gift of Speech, Improved Abilities, Improved Defense, Improved Abilities, Improved Soak

Qualities: Camouflage, Ambush Predator, Hardy

Personality Traits: Brave +3, Loyal to Julia +3, Inquisitive +1, Grouse (essential trait) +3

Combat:

Beak: Init +2, Attack +7, Defense +7, Damage -2

Dodge: Init +5, Attack n/a, Defense +7, Damage n/a

Soak: +7 (includes Bronze Cord)

Wound Penalties: -1 (1-3), -3 (4-6), -5 (7-9), Incapacitated (10-12), Dead (13+)

Abilities: Athletics 3 (flying), Awareness 4 (food), Brawl 4 (dodging), Faerie Lore 3 (faerie animals), Hunt 4 (spiders), Low German 3 (Flemish), Magic Theory 2 (enchantment), Music 2 (grouse-songs), Penetration 2 (Stand Your Ground power), Stealth 4 (stalking insects), Survival 5 (moorland)

Powers:

No Fatigue, 0 points, constant effect, Animal: Tetrix never gets tired. He has no fatigue levels, need not sleep, and cannot fall unconscious.

Stand Your Ground, 2 points, Init +4, Corpus or Animal: By confronting a person or animal and raising himself to his full height, Tetrix can freeze his target in her tracks. He can hold her still for as long as he confronts her, or else spend another point of might and leave her stuck until he is no longer in her presence. ReCo(An) 20 (base 5, +1 Eye, +1 Conc, +1 requisite); Greater Power (30 levels, +4 Init, +10 levels Penetration)

Snap of Awakening: Granted by the familiar bond, see main text for details.

Silent Speech: Granted by the familiar bond, see main text for details.

Vis: 3 pawns, in feathers

Appearance: Tetrix is a male black grouse (also called a blackcock). He is a handsome bird, with black plumage, red wattles, white wing-bars, and a lyreshaped tail. Like other game birds, his body is long and usually held horizontally, but when he stands upright he is about four feet tall.

Julia's choice of familiar — a black grouse — was somewhat whimsical; she was struck by the pun of &quot;textrix&quot; (&quot;weaver&quot;) with &quot;tetrix&quot; (&quot;grouse&quot;), but discovered a bird who is a fierce hunter of spiders. They have become the closest of friends.

Tetrix is naturally expert at remaining hidden, and receives a +3 bonus to Stealth rolls whenever he is not moving. Grouse eat plant shoots and insects; when hunting the latter he has a +3 bonus to his Attack Total in the first round of combat if his opponent is unaware of his presence.

The Familiar Bond was forged with a Rego Animal Lab Total of 38: Gold Cord +2, Silver Cord +1, Bronze Cord +2

(Tetrix was created using the rules in Realms of Power: Magic, Chapter 4)

<span id="snap-of-awakening"></span>
==== SNAP OF AWAKENING ====

ReMe 7

Pen 0, 3/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Tetrix can instantly awaken Julia with this power. Since he never sleeps himself, he is always on watch when she is resting. (Base 4, +1 Touch; +2 3/day)

<span id="silent-speech"></span>
==== SILENT SPEECH ====

CrMe 15

Pen 0, unlimited/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This is actually two effects, one to allow Julia to share words, images, and emotions with her familiar, and one to allow Tetrix to do the same with his maga.

(Base 4, +1 Touch; +10 unlimited uses)

apprentice. Julia has also invested two more effects into her familiar bond (2 seasons), and instilled another three effects in her talisman (4 seasons). Finally, she has spent two seasons making the brooch she calls Fruit of the Loom. She has also acquired 110 experience points in Arts and 120 experience points in Abilities.

<span id="new-spells-4"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Julia has developed several new spells, details of which are given here.

<span id="animal-spells-3"></span>
=== ''Animal Spells'' ===

<span id="shearing-the-unseen-sheep"></span>
==== '''Shearing the Unseen Sheep''' ====

CrAn 20

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Creates a sheep's fleece. Wool is the most common material for making clothing, but creating ready-made woolen garments

is difficult with Hermetic Magic. As a consequence, Julia uses this spell to create the raw materials, and then rearranges them into clothing using Rego Craft Magic, such as ''Woolen Garments for the Human Form'', below.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="sturdy-mantle-of-the-traveler"></span>
=== '''Sturdy Mantle of the Traveler''' ===

CrAn 30

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Creates a ''gardcorps'' — a calf-length traveling robe with voluminous sleeves. The garment is formed of supple leather oiled to proof it against rain. A Finesse roll determines the quality of the gardcorps; an Ease Factor of 6 results in a waterproof robe of standard quality. If an Ease Factor of 9 is achieved the caster can determine the color of the leather and a specific regional style.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 treated and processed)

<span id="madder-woad-and-weld"></span>
=== '''Madder, Woad, and Weld''' ===

MuAn(He) 20 R: Touch, D: Month, T: Group The touched cloth — which can be

wool, cotton, or linen — takes on a vivid hue as if dyed. Up to ten skeins of wool or 5 bolts of cloth can be dyed a single color chosen by the caster at the time of casting. When the spell's duration expires, the cloth reverts to its natural undyed color. The spell is named after the three principle dyes employed in the thirteenth century — madder produces red, brown, and pink, woad makes blue, and weld results in yellow. By dyeing and then over-dyeing with a different color, a whole range of russets, maroons, greens, and oranges can be produced through mundane craft. However, a single casting of this spell can produce any possible hue.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +3 Month, +2 Group, +1 requisite)

<span id="cloak-of-nessus"></span>
==== '''Cloak of Nessus''' ====

MuAn 35

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Part

The targeted item of clothing partially converts into poison. The wearer suffers terrible agony as the poison touches his skin, and must make a Stamina roll against an Ease Factor of 9 to avoid taking a Light Wound. This Stamina roll must be repeated every round that the wearer is in contact with the robe, or until the Duration ends. The spell is named after the cloak dipped in the blood of the centaur Nessus in Greek myth.

Since creating a poison of this strength has a base level of 15 (if it were an Aquam effect), two magnitudes are added for this effect, although since the poison is of Animal origin an Aquam requisite is not needed.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 Diam, +1 Part, +2 poison effect)

<span id="the-unraveled-seam"></span>
==== '''The Unraveled Seam''' ====

PeAn(He) 5

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Part

The touch of the caster causes a thread of animal or plant origin to decay, making the cloth it is holding together to come apart. The pieces of cloth can be sewn together again, so this is counted as damaging the garment rather than destroying it.

(base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Part, +1 requisite)

<span id="the-unraveled-clothes"></span>
==== '''The Unraveled Clothes''' ====

PeAn(He) 15 R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Group The targeted clothing falls apart as all

the stitches — both thread and leather — simultaneously unravel. The victim of this spell is left naked. If the victim is wearing leather armor (including metal-reinforced leather armor) then the armor falls into pieces. If the victim is wearing metal armor, the padding beneath the armor is affected. A character in this position suffers a –3 to all physical actions due to the shifting of his armor, and it grants only half of its Protection until the padding can be replaced. The clothes are capable of being repaired, so this is counted as damaging the garment rather than destroying it.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +2 Group, +1 requisite)

<span id="the-wizards-spindle"></span>
==== '''The Wizard's Spindle''' ====

ReAn 4

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Group

The caster converts up to 10 fleeces into wool. The wool is cleaned, carded, and spun in a single round. This requires a Finesse roll against an Ease Factor of 12, since it replicates more than a week's work completed in an instant. Failure to achieve this Ease Factor leaves the wool hopelessly tangled and useless.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Group)

<span id="dressing-the-human-form-in-wool"></span>
==== '''Dressing the Human Form in Wool''' ====

ReAn 5

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This spell crafts a single woolen garment from either raw fleeces or from spun wool. This spell is suitable for producing a cotte, cyclas, ganache, bliaut, cappa, or chausses (see the Clothing of the Thirteenth Century insert). A Finesse roll is necessary to determine the success of the craft magic; the Ease Factor is 12 if raw fleece is employed, or 9 if the base material is spun wool. The clothes produced are of standard quality; increase the Ease Factor for particularly fine or complex craft. If the Finesse roll fails, the caster is left with a useless mess of wool. Creating a fabric of a different color than the raw material requires a supply of appropriate dye, but does not change the Ease Factor. Julia typically uses this spell to manufacture clothes out of the magical cloth that she makes (see Enchanted Items, later). She does not have a spell that directly creates mundane clothing of wool due to the difficulty (it would be a similar spell to ''Sturdy Mantle of the Traveler'', earlier). Instead, it is much easier to simply create fleeces (see ''Shearing the Unseen Flock'', later) and then craft

<span id="clothing-in-the-thirteenth-century"></span>
=== ''Clothing in the Thirteenth Century'' ===

Many of Julia's spells create or craft items of clothing; this insert gives some details on the broad trends in clothing across Europe. Readers are encouraged to investigate the individual styles of the country in which their saga is set for a more-accurate picture of clothing.

The basic items of clothing for both sexes and all social classes are the chainse, the cotte, and the surcoat. The '''chainse''' is a linen smock with tight sleeves worn next to the skin for comfort. The more fashionable man wears a doublet (made of two layers of linen) or a jupe (quilted and padded chainse). On top of the chainse is the tunic or '''cotte''', which typically has sleeves as far as the elbows. Commoners typically wear shorter cottes than gentlefolk; the short cotte reaches the knees (for men) or the ankles (for women) whereas the long cotte is ankle-length (for men) and floorlength (for women). A women's cotte is sometimes called a gown or kirtle. Over the cotte is worn a '''surcoat''' that comes in a number of styles. The commonest — worn by both men and women — is the cyclas, which is a straight-sided sleeveless outer tunic that reaches the knees. The ganache is similar to the cyclas but has a matching hood and is typically worn by merchants and scholars. The height of fashion in surcoats in the thirteenth century is the bliaut, which is a long outer tunic reaching from the shoulders to the knees and wrists. It is shaped to hug the figure tightly at the waist and elbow. From the waist down the bliaut has full skirts, and from the elbow the sleeves flare into a trumpet shape. The sleeves and skirt are sometimes gored with a contrasting color. Both the cotte and surcoat are typically made of dyed wool, with red, green, and blue being the rarest (and thus most fashionable) colors.

On the legs both sexes wear '''chausses''', or hose, made as separate garments for each leg and reaching above the knee. '''Braies''' are linen drawers of varying length whose legs are tucked into the top of the hose to prevent them from falling down. '''Shoes''' are typically &quot;turnshoes,&quot; made inside out; they are comparatively flimsy in construction and typically wear out after a few months.

When traveling, a '''cloak''' or cape is commonly worn; the cappa is a short hooded cape that covers the upper torso, whereas the mantle is a more-extensive affair lined with fur. '''Headgear''' for a man is either a straw hat, a round cap, a beret, a coif, or a chaperon. The coif is a tight-fitting linen hood that is tied beneath the chin with strings, whereas a chaperon is a hood that covers the head and shoulders. Women's hats usually have a barbette (chin band) attached. They typically don coifs; the wimple and veil are considered old-fashioned but still worn by the older generation.

them into clothing with this spell.

This spell employs the Level 3 Rego Animal guideline on page 50 of ''Covenants'': &quot;treat and process items made of animal products.&quot; (Base 2, +1 Touch, +1 complexity)

<span id="ward-against-faeries-which-creep-and-crawl"></span>
==== '''Ward Against Faeries Which Creep and Crawl''' ====

ReAn 20

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

No faerie animal whose Faerie Might is equal or less to the level of the spell can affect the targeted Group as long as they remain within the ring. Julia commonly employs this spell every night along with a ''Circle of Beast Warding'' — after carefully sweeping the area to ensure that no spiders become trapped in the ring with her.

(As ward guideline)

<span id="constraint-of-the-strangling-vestments"></span>
= '''Constraint of the Strangling Vestments''' =

ReAn 35

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Group

The target's clothes develop a life of their own, and tighten around their owner's limbs rendering him unable to move. This spell only affects clothes of wool, leather, and fur. The constricting clothing makes it very hard for the wearer to breathe, and he risks strangulation; causing him to make a Deprivation roll ('''ArM5''', pages 180–181) every 30 seconds (or 5 combat rounds). Since Rego Animal lacks a guideline for making an animal product move with a purpose, the Rego Herbam guidelines have been used as an analogy.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +1 Diam, +2 Group)

<span id="corpus-spells-2"></span>
=== ''Corpus Spells'' ===

<span id="sealing-the-lips"></span>
=== '''Sealing the Lips''' ===

ReCo 10

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target is rendered unable to speak. It appears that his lips have been stitched together; this is a cosmetic effect.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

<span id="herbam-spells-3"></span>
=== ''Herbam Spells'' ===

<span id="clothe-the-naked-form"></span>
=== '''Clothe the Naked Form''' ===

CrHe 10

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Creates an individual garment made of linen or cotton, most commonly undergarments such as the chainse or braies (see the Clothing of the Thirteenth Century insert). A Finesse roll determines the quality of the clothes; an Ease Factor of 6 results in a garment of standard quality. If an Ease Factor of 9 is achieved then the caster can specify the brightness of the dye and any regional variations in style. Julia uses this spell rather than ''The Tailor's Craft Done in an Instant'' when she has no cloth at hand.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 treated and processed)

<span id="the-travelers-fortress-of-cloth"></span>
==== '''The Travelers' Fortress of Cloth''' ====

CrHe 20

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group

This spell creates a tent of waterproof canvas and wooden poles that is large enough to sleep 10 people. The canvas sides appear to grow out of surrounding vegetation, and erect and fasten themselves together. A Finesse roll determines the complexity and comfort of the tent; if the basic Ease Factor of 6 cannot be achieved then the tent leaks and has a musty smell, whereas an Ease Factor of 9 results in a pavilion of superior quality.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Group, +2 treated and finished product)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-30"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="weavers-trap-of-threads"></span>
==== '''Weaver's Trap of Threads''' ====

CrHe 20

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group

A huge net of thick threads grows in the indicated area, filling a space 5 paces by 5 paces by 6 feet high. With supports the nets can hang vertically, forming a wall, otherwise they act just like a fishing net. Everyone caught in the area is captured within the nets. Getting free requires a Strength stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9; or else someone who is not trapped may use an edged weapon to free a victim, which takes three rounds. Fire is exceptionally effective against the nets, but risks burning anyone caught within. The nets are not sticky, and cannot trap anyone who stumbles into them.

This spell is a deliberate reference to the better-known spell ''Weaver's Trap of Webs'', but the thought of emulating a spider is abhorrent to the arachnophobic Julia. Consequently, her version of this spell is less potent, as linen threads are less strong than spider's silk.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group)

<span id="the-clothiers-craft-done-in-an-instant"></span>
==== '''The Clothier's Craft Done in an Instant''' ====

ReHe 4

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Given an amount of linen or cotton cloth, the caster forms it into a garment according to her specifications. Typical garments made with this spell are the chainse or braies (see the Clothing of the Thirteenth Century insert) which are traditionally made of linen. A Finesse roll is necessary to determine the success of the craft magic; the Ease Factor is 9 for clothes of standard quality since it represents a day's work done in an instant. If the Finesse roll fails the caster is left with a useless pile of scraps of cloth. Creating a fabric of a different color than the raw material requires a supply of appropriate dye, but does not change the Ease Factor. Julia typically uses this spell to manufacture clothes out of the magical cloth that she makes (see Enchanted Items).

If starting with raw flax or cotton fibers, this spell would have needed to use the level 5 Rego Herbam guideline &quot;treat and process items made of plant products&quot; given in ''Covenants'', page 51. Julia has no need for this version, since her Faerie Blood allows her to effect the transformation from fiber to cloth anyway.

(Base 3, +1 Touch)

<span id="the-mended-tear"></span>
=== '''The Mended Tear''' ===

ReHe 5

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Part

The caster lays a piece of linen or cotton thread over a rent in any fabric and runs her finger over it; the cloth or leather is immediately repaired with a neat stitch. This Craft Magic spell requires successful Finesse roll against an Ease Factor of 6.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Part)

<span id="the-animate-attire"></span>
=== '''The Animate Attire''' ===

ReHe 20

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

One item of clothing starts to writhe and thrash under the direction of the caster. The clothing causes a major distraction to its wearer and can trip him up; he suffers a –3 to all actions, and rolls 3 extra botch dice while under the effect of this spell. While thirteenth century clothes are predominantly made of wool, underclothes are made of linen and this spell produces the best effect when cast on the victim's chainse or braies.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

<span id="embroidering-the-wizards-robes"></span>
==== '''Embroidering the Wizard's Robes''' ====

ReHe 20

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

The caster traces out a design on a piece of cloth, and a piece of thread follows her finger and is embroidered into the cloth. A Finesse roll of Ease Factor 9 is required for simple designs, but a 12 is needed for intricate embroidery. Failure to achieve this Ease Factor results in a tangled mess that needs to be unpicked by hand. Julia often &quot;signs&quot; any cloth or clothes she makes using this spell.

(Base 15, +1 Touch)

<span id="enchanted-items-4"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Julia created the following items.

<span id="loom-of-the-kabouters"></span>
=== ''Loom of the Kabouters'' ===

This beautiful loom is expertly made from elm and is a vertical loom, a relatively

recent introduction into Mythic Europe from the East. Every component is made from carefully carved wood; it does not have a single metal hinge, nail, or bolt. The only components that are not wooden are the stone weights keeping the warp threads taut during weaving, and these can be easily removed. The kabouters after whom the loom is named are a diminutive race of urban faeries from Julia's Flemish homeland, and she thought it appropriate to honor their skill in naming the item. The loom is a huge item of wood, and thus was prepared with ten pawns of Vim vis, of which six spaces still remain.

<span id="loom-of-elfin-proportions"></span>
==== '''Loom of Elfin Proportions''' ====

MuHe 23 Pen 0, 6/day R: Per, D: Conc, T: Ind

The loom can be shrunk to a tenth of its former size in each dimension, entailing a thousand-fold reduction in weight. Whereas it once stood six feet high, it is now only seven inches tall and can be easily carried in a backpack. Julia has a special box in which she keeps the shrunken loom so that none of the components will be lost or damaged in transit.

This spell is designed based on the ''Object of Increased Size'' spell ('''ArM5''', page 154), but has an extra magnitude of complexity to make the loom shrink to a smaller size than allowed by that spell.

(base 4, +1 Conc, +1 size, +1 complexity; +5 item maintains concentration, +3 6 per day)

<span id="panorama-of-the-heinzelmännchen"></span>
==== '''Panorama of the Heinzelmännchen''' ====

ReAn 10 Pen 0, 1/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Group

The loom weaves wool into an intricate tapestry described when the effect is triggered. The operator's skill at describing the effect in magical terms determines the quality of the tapestry; a Finesse roll of Ease Factor 12 is the minimum for a simple scene of standard quality. More-complex designs require higher Ease Factors. The finished tapestry can be any size up to one hundred square paces, and is woven exceptionally quickly rather than literally in a moment. The Heinzelmännchen are German brownies who are skilled at making clothes and weaving cloth.

(base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Group, +1 size, +1 intricacy)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-31"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="the-fruit-of-the-loom"></span>
=== ''The Fruit of the Loom'' ===

This brooch is an unremarkable piece of jewelry consisting of twisted ropes of copper wire forming a simple warp and weft pattern beneath a cast copper apple. This tiny item of base metal was prepared with five pawns of Vim vis, and has currently been instilled with three pawns' worth of effects.

<span id="the-everchanging-garments"></span>
=== '''The Everchanging Garments''' ===

MuAn(He) 28 Pen 0, 6/day

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Group

The clothes to which the brooch is pinned can be utterly changed in their style and components, although animal products must remain animal products and plant-based fabrics must remain plant-based. However, a woolen cyclas could be turned into a silk bliaut, and a cotton gown could become a linen scarf. Dyed materials retain their color, but possibly alter shade according to the natural color of the base material. The wielder of the item must briefly describe the clothing she desires, then make a Finesse roll to determine how exactly her instructions are carried out; an Ease Factor of 6 is needed to successfully emulate a simple change, but if the current clothes require dramatic improvement then the Ease Factor is higher. The clothes remain changed until the wielder desires to cancel the effect, but she must briefly concentrate to maintain it at sunrise or sunset.

(base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Group, +1 requisite; +5 item maintains concentration, +3 6/day)

<span id="magical-cloth"></span>
=== ''Magical Cloth'' ===

Julia's stock in trade is the creation of fabulous cloths that cannot be duplicated with mundane craft. She makes these fabrics as charged items using her Craft Magic Virtue rather than the usual process for making charged items. While this means she uses her Casting Total rather than her Laboratory Total, it takes her mere days to instill the effects rather than a season. Since she can manufacture at least one sheet of fabric each day through mundane means, it takes her one day per charge to create these charged items. She usually instills one charge into each sheet. For example, if her Casting Total is 23, it takes four days to make four sheets of cloth containing the ''Iridescence of the'' ''Mallard's Head'' effect, each holding one charge. She generally does not trigger the magic of the charged item until it has been formed into a garment, and each piece of cloth can have only a single magical effect. Julia's Enduring Magic often extends the duration of each effect to be much longer than specified.

<span id="iridescence-of-the-mallards-head"></span>
= '''Iridescence of the Mallard's Head''' =

MuIm 4

Pen 0, charged item

R: Per, D: Month, T: Ind

When triggered, this effect causes the dull green of the cloth to adopt an iridescent color not dissimilar to that found on the feathers of certain birds. When the effect fades the cloth reverts to its former color.

(Base 1, +3 Month)

<span id="staunch-the-bloody-wound"></span>
==== '''Staunch the Bloody Wound''' ====

CrCo 10

Pen 0, charged item

R: Touch, D: Month, T: Ind

When triggered, bandages made from this cloth give a +3 to Wound Recovery rolls.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +3 Month)

<span id="scintillation-of-the-phoenix"></span>
==== '''Scintillation of the Phoenix''' ====

CrIg 10

Pen 0, charged item

R: Per, D: Month, T: Ind

When triggered, this orange-yellow cloth glows with a light equivalent to torchlight and flickers like a living flame. This cloth is particularly popular among members of House Flambeau, who in the past have commissioned Julia to make ceremonial robes for attending the tribunal.

(Base 3, +3 Month)

<span id="constrain-the-shrewish-wife"></span>
==== '''Constrain the Shrewish Wife''' ====

MuMe 15

Pen 0, charged item

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

When triggered, clothes made from this cloth cause the wearer to become more considerate towards his or her loved ones. Julia occasionally hears of clients who are having trouble at home and make them clothes from this cloth to encourage better behavior.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +3 Moon)

<span id="curb-the-straying-husband"></span>
==== '''Curb the Straying Husband''' ====

MuMe 15 Pen 0, charged item

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

When triggered, clothes made from this cloth cause the wearer to become temperate, eschewing drink, violent behavior, and philandering. Julia makes clothing of this fabric for clients who have troublesome husbands.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +3 Moon)

<span id="cloth-of-unicorn-hair"></span>
=== '''Cloth of Unicorn Hair''' ===

Level 20 Pen 0, charged item R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Not actually formed from the hair of a unicorn (despite what she tells clients!), clothes made from this cloth grant the wearer immunity to poison. This effect is a product of Julia's Craft Magic rather than Hermetic Magic, and her &quot;Casting Total&quot; is equal to a Dexterity + Craft (Linen or Wool, as appropriate) roll instead. See ''Houses of Hermes: Societates'', page 131 for more details. The name is appropriate since she makes this cloth so rarely due to its difficulty.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="talisman-forfex-princeps"></span>
= ''Talisman: Forfex Princeps'' =

The &quot;Prince of Shears&quot; is Julia's talisman. These clothier's shears are two feet long and constructed from iron. Inlaid onto the blades are intricate filigrees of gold, copper, and lead. The invested item was initially prepared with ten pawns of Vim vis and currently has no enchantment space remaining.

<span id="attunements-1"></span>
==== '''Attunements''' ====

* +2 Shaping Fabric (cloth shears)
* +7 Harm/Repel Faeries (iron)
* +4 Deftness (copper)
* +4 Wards (lead)

<span id="snip-the-thread-of-a-faeries-might"></span>
=== '''Snip the Thread of a Faerie's Might''' ===

PeVi 25

Pen 20, 24/day

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Weakens a faerie. If the effect penetrates the Faerie's Might then it loses 10 points of Might.

(Base 0, +2 Voice; +10 Pen 30, +5 24/day)

<span id="sever-wood-and-bone"></span>
==== '''Sever Wood and Bone''' ====

PeAn(He) 12 Pen 0, 3/day R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This effect is rarely used for mundane tasks, since Julia is sufficiently skilled. Instead, she uses it where shears would not normally cut, like through bone or wood.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 requisite; +2 3/day)

<span id="gather-the-connection"></span>
==== '''Gather the Connection''' ====

ReCo(An) 30 Pen 10, 1/day

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

When triggered, this effect snips a lock of hair from the target (either human or animal) and delivers it to the wielder's hand. If done in a surreptitious fashion, the target must make a Perception + Awareness roll against an Ease Factor of 9 to realize that some of his hair has been stolen. Naturally Julia uses this effect to gain Arcane Connections, but uses it with caution for there is the real risk she could take hair from a magus unknowingly. This spell duplicates the mundane action of cutting hair, and does not need a Perdo requisite.

(Base 15, +2 Voice; +5 Pen 10)

<span id="sunder-stone"></span>
==== '''Sunder Stone''' ====

PeTe 12

Pen 0, 3/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

The shears can cut through any mineral substance that they can close around — metal, glass, or stone.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 affect metal; +2 3/day)

<span id="chapter-seven"></span>
=== ''Chapter Seven'' ===

<span id="lambert-of-merinita"></span>
= ''Lambert of Merinita'' =

'''Concept:''' This trader of goods and materials uses his magic to support his mercantile activities and his family, and overcome the social handicap of his Gift.

Lambert of Merinita was born into a merchant family, and a love of haggling and business was instilled in him at a very young age. The effects that Lambert's Gift had on people prevented him from achieving any real success as a youth, despite his charisma and enthusiasm. Lambert cared greatly for his family and maintained close contact with them throughout his apprenticeship and beyond, and he was married and had several children before finishing apprenticeship. The obligations and joys of providing for his family have dominated his life. Lambert's family makes its living by purchasing goods and materials and transporting them to where they can be sold at a profit. Lambert aids this business throughout his life by using his magic to find the most advantageous materials for purchase, and to transport these materials safely and quickly.

Lambert focuses his magic around the Art of Mentem, Faerie Magic, and the mercantile activities of his family.

Lambert is driven to haggle and make deals whenever he can, although his efforts in this field meet with mixed results. He is practiced in the art of bargaining, and becomes more so as he ages. He is also a skilled communicator with a formidable presence, yet The Gift makes it difficult for people to trust him; some (both human and faerie) who have forged agreements with Lambert often suspect that they have been poorly dealt with even if they can't think of any reason why they should feel so. Magi, on the other hand, are protected from the effects of Lambert's Gift, and so cutting deals with other members of the Order is a source of great joy for Lambert.

<span id="lambert-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Lambert at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per +1, Pre +3, Com+2, Str 0, Sta +1, Dex –1, Qik –1

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 31 (31) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0 '''Confidence Score:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Affinity with Mentem, Faerie Blood (Sidhe), Faerie Magic*, Puissant Mentem, Self Confident, Skilled Parens, Social Contacts (family business connections), Quiet Magic; Dependant; Busybody, Compulsion (haggling and negotiation),

Incompatible Arts (Rego Imaginem and Rego Mentem) , Unimaginative Learner * House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Assiduous +2, Brave –1, Reckless –3

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack–1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack N/A, Defense –1, Damage N/A

'''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1-5), –3 (6-10), –5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

<span id="initiation-into-the-mystery-of-arcadian-travel"></span>
=== ''Initiation into the Mystery of Arcadian Travel'' ===

Lambert has undergone initiation into the Minor Virtue of Arcadian travel through the group of Merinitae called the Wayfarers, using the script presented on page 80 of ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults''. During his Ordeal of Initiation, he made his way from Bayeux cathedral into a Faerie regio in the forested hills of Bayeux County, while being pursued by faerie boars. As a result of his initiation, Lambert

has acquired the Virtue Arcadian Travel and the Flaw Fear (swine). Also, Bayeux cathedral functions as a permanent Arcane Connection to Lambert.

When using Arcadian Travel, Lambert creates charms with the skill Profession (storyteller). Lambert sets sections of his stories down on paper to serve as objects associated with the charm.

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Brittany 2 (geography), Area Lore: Normandy 2 (politics), Artes Liberales 2 (arithmetic), Bargain 2 (with faeries), Carouse 2 (games of chance), Charm 2 (first impressions), Etiquette 2 (church), Faerie Lore 3 (bargaining with faeries), Folk Ken 2 (townsfolk), French 5 (Lorain), Guile 2 (fast talk), Intrigue 2 (rumor mongering), Latin 5 (Hermetic use), Leadership 2 (inspiration), Low German 2 (Flemish), Magic Theory 4 (inventing spells), Occitan 2 (Provencal), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (Politics), Parma Magica 1 (Mentem), Philosophiae 2 (ritual magic), Profession: Merchant 2 (commodity speculation), Ride 2 (speed)

'''Arts: Cr''' 1**, In 5, Mu** 5**, Pe** 3**, Re** 4, '''An''' 4**, Aq** 2(1)''', Au''' 0**, Co** 0**, He** 0**, Ig** 0**, Im** 0**, Me** 11+3**, Te** 0**, Vi** 0

'''Twilight Scars:''' none '''Equipment:''' none '''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0) '''Spells Known:'''

''Soothing Voice of the Stableman'' (ReAn 15/+9) ''Patch of Drought'' (PeAq 10/+5)

''Frosty Breath of the Spoken Lie'' (InMe 20/+20) ''Posing the Silent Question'' (InMe 20/+20)

''Tread of Fellow Travelers'' (InMe 30/+20)

''Blissful Messenger'' (MuMe 30/+20)

''Calm Mind of Resolute Behavior'' (PeMe 20 /+18)

''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+5)

'''Vis:''' none

'''Appearance:''' Lambert is a tall, thin man with dark hair and a solemn look that makes him seem more sad than his behavior indicates. He frequently dresses in the garb of a successful merchant. Although it is clear that his easy smile and friendly demeanor are at least in part the product of practice, their effusiveness goes a fair way toward offsetting the detrimental social effects of The Gift.

'''Activities immediately past gauntlet:''' Lambert, just out of apprenticeship, spends his time split between living the life of a merchant adventurer and an itinerant magus. He often avails himself of the generous hospitality laws of the Rhine tribunal. As a young magus, Lambert spends much of his time providing for his wife and children.

'''Casting Sigil:''' Lambert's casting sigil takes the form of coins. Items that he creates and alters have the images of coins subtly worked into their appearance. Creatures that are enchanted by Lambert's magics often have footsteps that seem to ring with the echo of clinking coins.

'''Voting Sigil''': Lambert's voting sigil is a wooden dowel carved into a caduceus. Lambert has on occasion turned inquires regarding his voting sigil into discussions regarding the mercantile association of Mercury.

<span id="lambert-15-years"></span>
=== ''Lambert +15 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per +1, Pre +3 (1), Com+2, Str 0, Sta +1, Dex –1, Qik –2 (1)

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 46 (46) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 (3) '''Warping Score:''' 3 (0) '''Confidence Score:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Affinity with Mentem, Arcadian Travel**, Faerie Blood (Sidhe), Faerie Magic*, Puissant Mentem, Self Confident, Skilled Parens, Social Contacts, Quiet Magic; Enemies (faerie merchants); Busybody, Compulsion (haggling and negotiation), Fear (Swine)**, Incompatible arts (Rego Imaginem and Rego Mentem), Unimaginative Learner, Weak Magic

\* House Virtue

\** Mystery Initiations and Ordeals

'''Personality Traits:''' Assiduous +2, Brave –1, Reckless –1

'''Combat:'''

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack–1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack N/A, Defense –1, Damage N/A

'''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1-5), –3 (6-10), –5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Brittany 2 (geography), Area Lore: Normandy 2 (politics), Artes Liberales 2 (arithmetic), Bargain 4 (with faeries), Carouse 2 (games of chance), Charm 2 (first impressions), Etiquette 2 (church), Faerie Lore 3 (bargaining with faeries), Faerie Magic 2 (Charm creation), Folk Ken 2 (townsfolk), French 5 (Lorain), Guile 2 (fast talk), Intrigue 2 (rumor mongering), Latin 5 (Hermetic use), Leadership 2 (inspiration) , Low German 2 (Flemish), Magic Theory 5 (inventing spells), Merinita Lore 1 (Wayfarers), Occitan 2 (Provencal), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (politics), Parma Magica 4 (Mentem) , Philosophiae 2 (ritual magic), Profession: Merchant 2 (commodity speculation), Profession: Storyteller 3 (faerie tales), Ride 2 (speed)

'''Arts: Cr''' 6**, In** 8(3)''', Mu''' 5**, Pe** 4**, Re** 4, '''An''' 7**, Aq** 4**, Au** 0**, Co** 5**, He** 0**, Ig** 0**, Im** 6**, Me** 18 +3(11)''', Te''' 0**, Vi** 6

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Casting Tablet of the spell ''Locked Storehouse''

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Soothing Voice of the Stableman'' (ReAn 15/+12)

''Patch of Drought'' (PeAq 10/+9)

''The Inexorable Search'' (InCo 20 /+14)

''Pull of Blood'' (InCo 20 /+14)

''Frosty Breath of the Spoken Lie'' (InMe 20/+30)

''Posing the Silent Question'' (InMe 20/+30)

''Scent of Loose Purses'' (InMe 30/+30)

''Stench of Hate'' (InMe 30/+30)

''Tread of Fellow Travelers'' (InMe 30/+30)

''Blissful Messenger'' (MuMe 30/+27)

''Calm Mind of Resolute Behavior'' (PeMe 20 /+26)

''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+5)

''Piercing the Faerie Veil'' (InVi 20/+15)

'''Vis:''' 5 pawns of Herbam vis in the form of berries that have a smell which attracts horses.

'''Appearance:''' Lambert is a tall, thin man with dark hair that is graying at the temples. He has a solemn look that makes him seem more sad than his behavior indi-

cates. He frequently dresses in the garb of a successful merchant. Although it is clear that his easy smile and friendly demeanor are at least in part the product of practice, their effusiveness goes a fair way toward offsetting the detrimental social effects of The Gift.

'''Activities in the last fifteen years:''' Lambert, 15 years out of apprenticeship, has children who are able to take care of themselves, and he even has a few grandchildren. Lambert has undergone Initiation in the mystery of Arcadian Travel through the Wayfarers (''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'', page 80). Lambert leaves most of the face-to-face dealing in his family's mercantile industry to his children, for fear of being accused of interfering with the mundanes (and because his children do not suffer from the corrosive social effects of The Gift). However, his love of bargaining frequently leads him into faerie auras and regiones to strike bargains with the fay. Much of Lambert's magical research in this period of his life involves providing tools for his family to use. By this point of his life, Lambert's mercantile activities have earned him the enmity of a powerful group of faeries. During this period, Lambert spent one season inventing Piercing the Faerie Veil and one season inventing The Inexorable Search, both with the assistance of Laboratory Texts. Lambert spent three seasons inventing Pull of Blood (with the help of unusual laboratory schedules and experimentation), four seasons inventing Scent of Loose Purses, and three seasons inventing Stench of Hate. Lambert spent one season copying Laboratory Texts to exchange for his casting tablet of the Locked Storehouse. Lambert spent three seasons serving House Merinita and the Wayfarers in conjunction with his Initiation into the Mystery of Arcadian Travel. During these fifteen years, Lambert gained 135 experience points in Abilities and 195 experience points in Arts (and an additional 39 from his affinity with Mentem).

<span id="lambert-30-years"></span>
=== ''Lambert +30 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per +1, Pre +3(1), Com+2 (1), Str 0, Sta +1, Dex –1, Qik –2

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 61 (47) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 (3) '''Warping Score:''' 4 (10)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-32"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

'''Confidence Score:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Affinity with Mentem, Arcadian Travel**, Faerie Blood (Sidhe), Faerie Magic*, Puissant Mentem, Self Confident, Skilled Parens, Social Contacts, Quiet Magic; Enemies (Faerie merchants); Busybody, Compulsion (Haggling and Negotiation), Fear (Swine)**, Incompatible arts (Rego Imaginem and Rego Mentem) , Unimaginative Learner, Weak Magic

\* House Virtue

\** Mystery Initiations and Ordeals

'''Personality Traits:''' Assiduous +2, Brave –1, Reckless +1

'''Reputations:''' Overly Concerned with Mundanes (Quaesitors) +1, Compulsive dealmaker (Tribunal) +1, Dangerous Bargainer (local faeries) +2

'''Combat:'''

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack–1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense –1, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1-5), –3 (6-10), –5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Brittany 2 (geography), Area Lore: Normandy 2 (politics), Artes Liberales 2 (arithmetic), Bargain 5 (with faeries), Carouse 2 (games of chance), Charm 2 (first impressions), Dominion Lore 1 (Divine creatures), Etiquette 2 (church), Faerie Lore 3 (bargaining with faeries), Faerie Magic 3 (Charm creation), Folk Ken 2 (townsfolk), French 5 (Lorain), Guile 2 (fast talk), Infernal Lore 1 (demons), Intrigue 2 (rumor mongering), Latin 5 (Hermetic use), Leadership 2 (inspiration), Low German 2 (Flemish), Magic Lore 1 (creatures) , Magic Theory 6 (inventing spells), Merinita Lore 2 (Wayfarers), Occitan 2 (Provencal), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (politics), Parma Magica 4 (Mentem), Philosophae 2 (ritual magic), Profession: Merchant 2 (commodity speculation), Profession: Storyteller 3 (faerie tales), Ride 2 (speed), Teaching 2 (merchants)

'''Arts: Cr''' 6**, In** 12**, Mu** 5**, Pe** 6**, Re** 7, '''An''' 7**, Aq** 5**, Au 5, Co** 6(2)''', He''' 5**, Ig** 5**, Im** 6**, Me** 22 +3(13)''', Te 5, Vi''' 6

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Casting Tablet of the spell ''Locked Storehouse'', Coin of Enthusiastic Patrons, Coin of Petulant Customers

'''Encumbrance:''' 0

<span id="spells-known-5"></span>
==== '''Spells Known:''' ====

''Soothing Voice of the Stableman'' (ReAn 15/+15) ''Patch of Drought'' (PeAq 10/+12) ''The Inexorable Search'' (InCo 20 /+19) ''Pull of Blood'' (InCo 20 /+19) ''Memory of the Distant Dream'' (CrMe 20/+32) ''Frosty Breath of the Spoken Lie'' (InMe 20/+38) ''Posing the Silent Question'' (InMe 20/+38) ''Thoughts Within Babble'' (InMe 25 /+38) ''Familial Secrets'' (InMe 30/+38) ''Scent of Loose Purses'' (InMe 30/+38) ''Stench of Hate'' (InMe 30/+38) ''Tread of Fellow Travelers'' (InMe 30/+38) ''Opinions of the Masses'' (InMe 35/+38) ''Oath Breaker's Confession'' (InMe 40 /+38) ''Blissful Messenger'' (MuMe 30/+31) ''Confusion of the Numbed Will'' (PeMe 15/+32) ''Loss of But a Moment's Memory'' (PeMe 15/+32) ''Calm Mind of Resolute Behavior'' (PeMe 20 /+32)

''Mind Cleansed of Treachery'' (PeMe 45/+32) ''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+13)

''Piercing the Faerie Veil'' (InVi 20/+19)

'''Vis:''' 4 pawns of Herbam vis in a wooden ring, 5 pawns of Intellego vis in the form of bottles of water removed from a reflecting pool; this water still bears the reflection of the moon upon its surface regardless of its location.

'''Appearance:''' Lambert is a tall, thin man with dark hair that is graying at the temples. He has a solemn look that makes him seem more sad than his behavior indicates. He frequently dresses in the garb of a successful merchant. Although it is clear that his easy smile and friendly demeanor are at least in part the product of practice, their effusiveness goes a fair way toward offsetting the detrimental social effects of The Gift.

'''Activities in the last fifteen years:''' Lambert, 30 years out of apprenticeship, is concerned with administering the business that his family runs. He spends a good deal of time with his grandchildren. At age 47, Lambert struck a deal with a fellow magus to receive a longevity ritual; this occupied two seasons of Lambert's time, one assisting with the ritual and another using Lambert's influence and wealth to pay for the service. Lambert has spent one season upgrading his laboratory, giving it the Highly Organized Virtue and an orb as a lesser feature (see ''Covenants'' Chapter 9). He has spent one season inventing Memory of the Distant Dream, one season Inventing Confusion of the Numbed Will, one season Inventing Loss of But a Moment's Memory, two seasons inventing Familial Secrets,

two seasons inventing Oath Breaker's Confession, and two seasons inventing Opinions of the Masses. Lambert has spent one season learning Mind Cleansed of Treachery from a Lab Text, and one season learning Thoughts Within Babble from Laboratory Texts. He has spent one season opening the Doorframe of the Wary Steward, and two seasons enchanting it. During this period, Lambert has gained 110 experience points in Abilities and 190 experience points in Arts (and an additional 25 experience points in Mentem due to his Affinity). Lambert has also devoted three entire seasons to spending time with his children and grandchildren.

<span id="lambert-45-years"></span>
=== ''Lambert +45 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per +1, Pre +3(1), Com+2, Str 0, Sta +1, Dex –1, Qik –2

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 76 (49) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 (3)

'''Warping Score:''' 5 (15) '''Confidence Score:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Affinity with Mentem, Arcadian Travel**, Faerie Blood (Sidhe), Faerie Magic*, Puissant Mentem, Self Confident, Skilled Parens, Social Contacts, Quiet Magic; Enemies (faerie merchants); Busybody, Compulsion (haggling and negotiation), Fear (Swine)**, Incompatible Arts (Rego Imaginem and Rego Mentem), Unimaginative Learner, Weak Magic

\* House Virtue

\** Mystery Initiations and Ordeals

'''Personality Traits:''' Assiduous +2, Brave –1, Reckless +2

'''Reputations:''' Overly Concerned with Mundanes (Quaesitors) +1, Compulsive dealmaker (Tribunal) +1, Dangerous Bargainer (local faeries) +2, Skilled in Mentem (Tribunal) +2

<span id="combat-6"></span>
==== '''Combat:''' ====

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack–1, Defense –1, Damage 0 ''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense –1, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1-5), –3 (6-10), –5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-33"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Brittany 2 (geography), Area Lore: Normandy 2 (politics), Artes Liberales 2 (arithmetic), Bargain 5 (with faeries), Carouse 2 (games of chance), Charm 2 (first impressions), Dominion Lore 1 (Divine creatures), Etiquette 2 (church), Faerie Lore 3 (bargaining with faeries), Faerie Magic 3 (Charm creation), Folk Ken 2 (townsfolk), French 5 (Lorain), Guile 2 (fast talk), Infernal Lore 1 (demons), Intrigue 2 (rumor mongering), Latin 5 (Hermetic use), Leadership 2 (inspiration), Low German 2 (Flemish), Magic Lore 1 (creatures), Magic Theory 5 (inventing spells), Merinita Lore 2 (Wayfarers), Occitan 2 (Provencal), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (politics), Parma Magica 4 (Mentem), Philosophae 2 (ritual magic), Profession: Merchant 2 (commodity speculation), Profession: Storyteller 3 (faerie tales), Ride 2 (speed), Teaching 2 (merchants)

'''Arts: Cr''' 10**, In** 12**, Mu** 12**, Pe** 10**, Re** 11**; An** 7**, Aq** 5**, Au 5, Co** 6(2)''', He''' 13**, Ig** 5**, Im** 6**, Me** 25+3 (10)''', Te 5, Vi''' 7

'''Twilight Scars:''' People in the vicinity of Lambert do not loose their mental focus as a result of tiredness, nor are they able to nod off unintentionally.

'''Equipment:''' Casting Tablet of the spell ''Locked Storehouse'', Ring of the Cold Iron Mind, Coin of Enthusiastic Patrons, Coin of Petulant Customers, Granary Chest, Token of the Harvest Evening**.**

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 '''Spells Known:'''

''Opening the Tome of the Animal's Mind'' (InAn 25/+20)

''Soothing Voice of the Stableman'' (ReAn 15/+19)

''Patch of Drought'' (PeAq 10/+16)

''The Inexorable Search'' (InCo 20 /+19)

''Pull of Blood'' (InCo 20 /+19)

''Intuition of the Forest'' (InHe 10 /+26)

''Converse with Plant and Tree'' (InHe 25 /+26)

''Memory of the Distant Dream'' (CrMe 20/+39)

''Family Gathering'' (Cr(In)Me 40/+39)

''Missive of Memory'' (CrMe40/+39)

''Frosty Breath of the Spoken Lie'' (InMe 20/+41)

''Posing the Silent Question'' (InMe 20/+41)

''Thoughts Within Babble'' (InMe 25 /+41)

''Familial Secrets'' (InMe 30/+41)

''Scent of Loose Purses'' (InMe 30/+41)

''Stench of Hate'' (InMe 30/+41)

''Tread of Fellow Travelers'' (InMe 30/+41)

''Opinions of the Masses'' (InMe 35/+41)

''Oath Breaker's Confession'' (InMe 40 /+41)

''Blissful Messenger'' (MuMe 30/+41)

''Confusion of the Numbed Will'' (PeMe 15/+39)

''Mind Cleansed of Treachery'' (PeMe 45/+39)

''Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+17)

''Piercing the Faerie Veil'' (InVi 20/+20)

''Wrappings of Metaphysical Iron'' (ReVi 20/+26P )

P includes spell potency bonus

'''Vis:''' 2 pawns of Herbam vis in a wooden ring, 6 pawns of Intellego vis stored in small reflective coins, 4 pawns of Mentem vis in the form of bottles of faeriemade wine.

'''Appearance:''' Lambert is a tall, thin man with dark hair that is graying at the temples. He has a solemn look that makes him seem more sad than his behavior indicates. He frequently dresses in the garb of a successful merchant. Although it is clear that his easy smile and friendly demeanor are at least in part the product of practice, their effusiveness goes a fair way toward offsetting the detrimental social effects of The Gift.

'''Activities in the last fifteen years:''' Lambert, 45 years out of apprenticeship, is still close to his children, grandchildren, and great grandchildren, but he is no longer particularly active in running his family's business, leaving the responsibility to his descendants. Lambert at this age devotes much of his passion to investigating faeries and faerie regiones. During this period, Lambert spent five seasons inventing Blindness of Involuntary Obstinacy, four seasons inventing Family Gathering, and four seasons Inventing Missive of Memory. Lambert spent one season each inventing Converse with Plant and Tree, Opening the Tome of the Animal's Mind, and Wrappings of Metaphysical Iron with the assistance of Lab Texts. He spent one seasoning opening the Granary Chest for Enchantment, two seasons enchanting The Convenient Warehouse, one season Enchanting Carpentry of Brass, and one season enchanting Charm versus Dampness. Lambert spent one season creating the Token of the Harvest Evening. Lambert also lost two seasons exploring Faerie regios. During these fifteen years Lambert gained 270 experience points in Arts (and an additional 23 experience in Mentem from his affinity).

<span id="new-spells-5"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Lambert has developed the following new spells.

<span id="animal-spells-4"></span>
=== ''Animal Spells'' ===

'''Soothing Voice of the Stableman'''

ReAn 15

R: Voice D: Sun, T: Individual

This spell implants the suggestion that the caster is a safe and helpful friend into the mind of the target animal. The spell maintains this suggestion in the mind of the animal for the duration of the spell, regardless of the actions of the caster. This spell can not remove the sense of unease that an animal will feel when exposed to a Gifted character, but an animal of bestial intelligence will not be able to associate its unease with the caster.

Horses subject to this spell can be used as mounts by magi who do not have the Gentle Gift, but the uneasiness of such mounts makes them skittish and fearful. In situations where the mood of the animal is important, the Ease Factor of appropriate rolls should be 3 higher than normal and subject to one or more additional botch dice.

The effect of the Blatant Gift is sufficiently strong to make animals frenzied when they are both subject to this spell and exposed to a Blatantly Gifted caster. Animals that are Warped from long-term exposure to this spell often become belligerent and frightened all of the time.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 size)

<span id="aquam-spells-1"></span>
=== ''Aquam Spells'' ===

<span id="patch-of-drought"></span>
==== '''Patch of Drought''' ====

PeAq 10

R: Voice D: Momentary, T: Individual

The caster destroys the water in a patch of mud or a puddle up to 20 paces in diameter. Repeated use of this spell can make travel using a cart significantly faster in wet

<span id="magi-of-hermes-34"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

weather and possible on even dirt roads during adequate weather.

(Base 4, +2 Voice)

<span id="corpus-spells-3"></span>
=== ''Corpus Spells'' ===

<span id="pull-of-blood"></span>
==== '''Pull of Blood''' ====

InCo 20

R: Touch, D: Momentary, T: Bloodline, Faerie

This spell informs the caster of the direction and distance to each living descendant of the target. Lambert frequently casts this spell upon himself to keep track of his large family.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +3 Bloodline)

<span id="herbam-spells-4"></span>
=== ''Herbam Spells'' ===

<span id="locked-storehouse"></span>
==== '''Locked Storehouse''' ====

MuHe (Te) Level 45

R: Touch, D: Year +1, T: Structure, Ritual, Faerie

This Spell Changes a building and the building's contents into a large rock of hard igneous stone for a year and a day. The rock is typically significantly smaller than the altered building (having approximately the same mass as the building), and is buried to the depth of the building's foundation. If there is any material containing animal products in the building (such as leather or wool), then the spell must be cast with an Animal casting requisite or the spell will not function. Over the duration of the spell, the target building and its contents age normally but do not suffer decay in any other respect; Thus no mold or water damage affect the building's contents, but foodstuffs that have been aged for a year and a day would still be far from appetizing.

Lambert has traded to acquire a casting tablet (''Covenants'' page 89) of the spell Locked Storehouse; he does not know the spell himself. The casting tablet specifies the use of three pawns of Muto vis and six pawns of Terram vis.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +4 Year+1, +3 Structure, +1 complexity)

<span id="mentem-spells-2"></span>
=== ''Mentem Spells'' ===

<span id="missive-of-memory"></span>
=== '''Missive of Memory''' ===

CrMe 40

R: Arcane Connection, D: Moon, T: Individual

This spell creates a complete memory in the mind of the target. The target retains this memory until the duration of the spell expires. After the spell expires, the target may still recall those times when he dwelt on the memory. This spell-induced memory itself is false and may be discovered as such with an Intelligence roll against an Ease Factor of 9 (in the same manner as a memory created by the spell ''Memory of the Distant Dream'').

Lambert frequently uses this spell for communication with distant associates (but not with magi who are, as a nearly universal rule, uncomfortable leaving Arcane Connections with others). To draw attention to the information that he wants to convey, Lambert typically creates memories for the target's very recent past that are clearly impossible, such as a memory of the target and a talking statue having had a long conversation on a snowy mountaintop within the last ten minutes.

While this spell only takes a moment to cast, the magus needs to have a clear understanding of the memory that he wants to create in his own mind before creating it in the mind of the target. If the magus is not prepared, he cannot create a complex memory lasting more than a moment, or a longer memory that contains any great detail and is not repetitive. The preparation of any complex memory takes at least as long for the magus to create as the elapsed time of the memory that is created. Lambert specifically designed ''Missive of Memory'' to not Warp his second daughter.

(Base 5 +4 Arcane Connection, +3 Moon)

<span id="blissful-messenger"></span>
==== '''Blissful Messenger''' ====

MuMe 30

R: Touch, D: Until, T: Individual, Faerie, Ritual

This spell alters the target's recollection of an event, changing the memories of what actually occurred into memories of a

different event decided upon by the caster. This spell is undone by speaking to a specific individual about the altered memories, and the individual who releases the spell must be included in the altered memories in some significant way. For example, the individual could be discussed, the memories could include a prominently placed picture of the individual, or the individual could be &quot;present&quot; in the altered memories. Often the spell is cast to change the recollections of an event into the recollections of a conversation specifying exactly how the spell is to be broken.

A Tytalus maga who had need of sending agents to areas where they might be subject to investigation by Mentem spells convinced Lambert's mater to allow Lambert to study the Lab Text for this spell as an apprentice. Lambert then used the spell for the benefit of the Tytalus who compensated Lambert's mater for the service. The vis cost of performing the ritual, and the rarity of people willing to trust a Gifted magus sufficiently to allow their memories to be altered, prevents this from being a frequently used tool.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +4 Until)

<span id="scent-of-loose-purses"></span>
==== '''Scent of Loose Purses''' ====

InMe 30

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Smell

The target of this spell can detect desire and interest as a scent given off by any mind in the target's vicinity. The more powerful the emotion of desire felt by a person, the stronger a smell that the target of ''Scent of Loose Purses'' will detect from them.

Lambert frequently casts this spell on his family and people in his employ to help them learn to read the emotions of people with whom they come in contact. Oftentimes Lambert will have someone who does not have ''Scent of Loose Purses'' cast upon her give her impressions of people to someone who does, so that they both learn to perceive cues without the aid of magic.

(Base 5, +1 Touch +2 Sun, +2 Smell)

<span id="stench-of-hate"></span>
==== '''Stench of Hate''' ====

InMe 30

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Smell

The target of this spell can detect antipathy, dislike, and hate in all of its forms as a

Lambert frequently casts this spell on his family and people in his employ to help them learn to read the emotions of people with whom they come in contact.

(Base 5, +1 Touch +2 Sun, +2 Smell)

<span id="tread-of-fellow-travelers"></span>
==== '''Tread of Fellow Travelers''' ====

InMe 30

R: Road, D: Diameter, T: Group, Faerie

The caster learns the number, state of consciousness, direction and distance to the nearest group of minds on the road he is on in one direction (apart from any group that the caster is in). The caster continues to sense this information for the duration of the spell.

This spell and similar magics are common among members of House Merinita. Road Range provides practitioners of Faerie Magic with a tool that can cast spells at very long ranges fairly easily. Such spells, however, can not be cast on targets that are not sensed because of the law of Arcane Connections ('''ArM5''' page 80). ''Tread of Fellow Travelers'' allows the caster to sense targets and thereby cast other spells of Range Road upon them. (Members of House Merinita have developed similar spells using other Hermetic Forms).

(Base 5, +2 Road, +1 Diameter, +2 Group)

<span id="familial-secrets"></span>
==== '''Familial Secrets''' ====

InMe 30

R: Personal, D: Momentary, T: Bloodline, Faerie

By casting this spell, the magus learns what all of his descendants believe to be the answer to a question chosen by the magus at the time of casting. This spell functions in a manner similar to the spell ''Posing the Silent Question'' ('''ArM5''' page 149). It is not always obvious to the caster which answer came from which descendant. To be certain which descendant a particular answer came from, the caster must typically make a Perception + Awareness roll against an Ease Factor of 3 plus the number of descendants that are affected by the spell (this Ease Factor can be higher if the caster is unfamiliar with some

of his or her descendants). The caster does not need to possess Arcane Connections to his descendants for this spell to function. This spell works through the connection of blood. Lambert specifically designed ''Familial Secrets'' to not Warp members of his bloodline ('''ArM5''' page 92).

(Base 15, +3 Bloodline)

<span id="oath-breakers-confession"></span>
==== '''Oath Breaker's Confession''' ====

InMe 35

R: Eye, D: Bargain &amp; Momentary, T: Individual, Faerie

Like all spells of Bargain Duration, this spell is cast immediately after the caster strikes a bargain with the target and only takes effect if the target breaks her part of the bargain within one year ('''ArM5''' page 92). If it should come to pass that the target of ''Oath Breaker's Confession'' breaks her agreement, then the caster instantly becomes aware that the bargain has been broken and also learns exactly why and how the target believes that she broke the agreement.

(Base 15, +1 Eye, +3 Momentary &amp; Bargain)

<span id="opinions-of-the-masses"></span>
==== '''Opinions of the Masses''' ====

InMe 35

R: Personal, D: Concentration, T: Hearing When this spell is cast, the magus chooses a specific question. For the duration of the spell, the caster will hear a voice answering this question from each mind that he comes in contact with. The thoughts of minds that have dwelled heavily on the magus's question are perceived as clear voices, the thoughts of minds that have given the matter little thought are perceived as loud whispers. Minds that have never considered the issue (and minds that are protected by Magic Resistance that the spell failed to penetrate) do not make any sound at all. Lambert has on occasion, by use of this spell, heard the opinions of spirits and invisible creatures to which he would have otherwise have been oblivious.

If the caster is surrounded by many people, the noise generated by this spell can interfere with the caster's ability to hear normal sounds. The Ease Factor of rolls involving listening should be increased if the caster is surrounded by people with strong opinions while this spell is in effect.

(Base 15, +1 Concentration, +3 Hearing)

<span id="family-gathering"></span>
=== '''Family Gathering''' ===

Mu(In)Me 40

R: Personal, D: Concentration T: Bloodline, Faerie

This spell alters the perceptions of the caster and all of those people who are descended from him or her. The affected people think themselves to be in a large, comfortable, well-lit room sitting around a table sufficiently large to seat every member of the bloodline, rather than at their actual locations. Those affected by the spell perceive their relatives to be with them in this room. The room itself is heavily influenced by the caster's wizard's sigil.

The members of the bloodline are able to speak to one another as if they were in the same room. If a member of the bloodline is asleep when Family Gathering is cast, the spell will not wake that family member; instead that person will experience the spell as a dream and he will have no easier of a time remembering the meeting than he would have remembering any other dream. The words and actions of a dreaming person are often, but not always, sufficiently odd to alert other participants to his or her state.

During the spell's duration, none of the family are able to receive information from their normal senses. (In terms of the mind as explained in ''Art and Academe'', the forms and images collected by the target's senses are overwritten in the target's common sense by the ''Family Gathering'' spell). The targets of this spell are still able to move and control their bodies, but their inability to perceive their actual surroundings makes this a dangerous proposition.

Prior to inventing this spell, Lambert on occasion spontaneously cast a Range: Personal, Target: Bloodline version of ''Words of the Unbroken Silence'' and used ''Familial Secrets'' to communicate with his children, but he found such communication to be very taxing. Lambert created ''Family Gathering'' to facilitate clear communication. This spell is specifically designed to not Warp members of Lambert's bloodline.

(Base 15, +1 Concentration, +3 Bloodline, +1 Intellego requisite)

<span id="calm-mind-of-resolute-behavior"></span>
== '''Calm Mind of Resolute Behavior''' ==

PeMe 20

R: Personal, D: Diameter, T: Individual For the duration of this spell, all emotions are banished from the caster's mind. This makes the caster unable to feel fear, doubt,

Lambert's mater believed that this spell was an essential tool for anyone who dealt with the faeries. She believed that casting ''Calm Mind of Resolute Behavior'', to provide Lambert with a moment's clear reflection before embarking on an activity that might be influenced by the persuasion of charismatic faeries, would save her apprentice from many unwise decisions. Lambert casts ''Calm Mind of Resolute Behavior'' when he has an important choice to make and wants to see how he would approach the problem without the complications of his emotions coloring the issue. Lambert finds casting this spell to be quite unpleasant, though, and he greatly fears the possible consequences of miscasting a Perdo Mentem spell on himself.

(Base 15, +1 Diameter)

<span id="blindness-of-involuntary-obstinacy"></span>
= '''Blindness of Involuntary Obstinacy''' =

PeMe 40

R: Sight, D: Concentration, T: Group

The targets of this spell become, for the duration of the spell, completely unable to perceive a particular object or entity chosen by the caster while casting the spell. The senses of the targets still work properly, but the minds of the targets are prevented from concluding that the specified person or object exists. In the terms presented in ''Art and Academe'', this spell removes the ability of the common sense to receive or integrate images of a specified object or entity. Lambert frequently specifies himself as the unperceivable object while using this spell.

(Base 10, +3 Sight, +1 Concentration, +2 Group)

<span id="mind-cleansed-of-treachery"></span>
==== '''Mind Cleansed of Treachery''' ====

PeMe 45

R: Eye, D: Bargain &amp; Momentary, T: Individual, Faerie

Like all spells of Bargain Duration, this spell is cast immediately after the caster strikes a bargain with the target, and only takes effect if the target breaks his part of the bargain

<span id="enchanted-items-5"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Lambert has developed or traded for these enchanted items.

<span id="coins-of-loose-tongued-patrons"></span>
=== ''Coins of Loose-Tongued Patrons'' ===

Lambert acquired these two silver coins through trade with a fellow magus. Each coin bears a crown on one side and a likeness of Mercere on the other. The image of Mercere is laughing on the Coin of Enthusiastic Patrons, and grimacing on the Coin of Petulant Customers. Each of the two coins is a lesser enchanted device created with three pawns of vis. Lambert does not always keep these items to himself; rather they are frequently held by other members of his family. Lambert finds that the most valuable use of the coins is not in using them to strike advantageous bargains, but in allowing his family to receive copious accurate feedback regarding what people think of their merchandise (indeed, frequent use of the coins could lead to Warping of his family).

<span id="blessing-of-enthusiastic-patrons"></span>
= '''Blessing of Enthusiastic Patrons''' =

ReMe Level 25 Pen +0, 1/day R: Touch D: Sun, T: Room

When the coin enchanted with Blessing of Enthusiastic Patrons is touched to the wall of a room, the coin enchants the room to alter the proclivities of people within it. People within the enchanted room are compelled to dwell on and talk about the positive and desirable qualities of any merchandise that is shown or discussed. Use of this effect adds a modifier of −6 to any Bargain rolls made by purchasers affected by the spell.

(Effect: Base 10, +1 Touch +2 Room)

<span id="curse-of-petulant-customers"></span>
==== '''Curse of Petulant Customers''' ====

ReMe Level 25 Pen +0, 1/day R: Touch D: Sun, T: Room

a room, the coin enchants the room to alter the proclivities of people within it. People within the enchanted room are compelled to dwell on and speak about any negative aspects and flaws that they perceive with any merchandise that is shown or spoken about. Use of this effect adds a modifier of +6 to any Bargain rolls made by purchasers affected by the spell.

(Effect: Base 10, +1 Touch +2 Room)

<span id="doorframe-of-the-wary-steward"></span>
=== ''Doorframe of the Wary Steward'' ===

Lambert was unable to create the Coins of Loose-Tongued Patrons for himself. He exchanged the following invested device to acquire them. At no point does Lambert posses a copy of this device, but he does have Lab Texts for its creation that he would be willing to part with for a suitable price.

This is a door frame of maple and hazel that was incorporated into the structure of a covenant. On the top of the frame is a small hollow with a nail driven into it. A tiny bell was designed to be hung upon this nail. The frame was opened using eight pawns of vis. When the doorframe was delivered, it had one invested power that took up four of the door's eight pawns of capacity for enchantment.

<span id="doorframe-of-the-wary-steward-1"></span>
== '''Doorframe of the Wary Steward''' ==

InMe 35, 0 penetration

R: Special, D: Momentary, T: Individual When any creature passes through this doorframe, the enchantment determines whether or not that creature believes that they intend any harm towards the people who dwell within the covenant. If the creature does so believe, then the door frame shakes, causing the bell affixed to the doorframe to ring. As a Mentem effect this power will not function on animals, and also as a Hermetic effect it is restrained by the Limit of the Infernal.

(Effect: Base 15, +1 Range Touch equivalent, +1 non-standard range, +10 levels unlimited uses per day)

('''ArM5''' page 92). If it should come to pass that the target of this spell breaks the agreement within a year of the date when the deal was made, then the target's memory is destroyed, removing every stored idea that the target possesses and his sense of identity. All General Abilities (including languages) are retained, but knowledge of Academic, Arcane, Martial, and Supernatural Abilities are lost, as are all Arts. The target's imagination, which stores images, is not affected, so he recognizes the faces of people he knows, places he has been, and songs he has heard, but lacks all knowledge about those things such as names, locations, emotional importance, and so forth.

Lambert secured a Lab Text for this spell from the Merinita who developed it, in exchange for a copy of the Lab Text for ''Oath Breaker's Confession''. Lambert wanted to have a spell that provided a profoundly serious consequence for breaking an agreement, and the creator of ''Mind Cleansed of Treachery'' wished to acquire a spell that left its targets in a condition that could still be negotiated with.

(Base 25, +1 Eye, +3 Momentary &amp; Bargain)

<span id="vim-spells"></span>
=== ''Vim Spells'' ===

<span id="wrappings-of-metaphysical-iron"></span>
= '''Wrappings of Metaphysical Iron''' =

ReVi Gen R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual

This spell wards an object from being touched or manipulated by faeries or faerie magic. Faeries with Might greater than the spell's level are not restrained by this spell, nor are faeries that resist the spell's Penetration.

Lambert's version of this spell was developed from laboratory notes made by a Merinita magus with the virtue of Spell Potency (''The Mysteries Revised Edition'' page 31 or ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'' page 6) concerning faeries. Lambert is unable to cast this spell unless he wraps an iron chain around the protected item at the time of the casting. Due to the influence of the iron chain, this spell is cast with a Potency Bonus of +7.

Lambert finds that faeries rarely confront him about his use of this spell when he casts it on goods that he brings into their lands, but they become exceedingly displeased by the spell when it is used upon any item that is native to their home.

(Base Effect, no modifier Ring to Sun)

<span id="granary-chest"></span>
=== ''Granary Chest'' ===

This is a large oaken chest with brass hardware of simple design. The chest measures two and a half feet wide, a foot and a half deep, and foot and a half tall. The Granary Chest is an invested device opened with eight pawns of vis (opening only the wood, as the highest capacity component). The chest is invested with three powers.

<span id="convenient-warehouse"></span>
==== '''Convenient Warehouse''' ====

MuHe 24

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Personal, D: Day (constant), T: Room Any item consisting entirely of plant material that is placed completely within the chest is shrunken to the size of a grain of wheat until it is removed from the chest. Linen bags filled with grain, vegetables, or fruit are the items most commonly stored within the chest by Lambert's family. Shrunken materials that are kept within the chest for long periods of time can Warp, often becoming unnaturally shaped. Lambert's family has found it often difficult to find a particular grain-sized item within the chest. They have taken to only placing items stored in colored linen bags into the chest, assigning

certain bag colors to particular contents. This

<span id="magi-of-hermes-35"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

has helped to reduce difficulties, but has not completely eliminated them.

(Effect: Base 3, +2 Day, +2 Room, +1 excessive size change; Modifications +1 activation twice per day, +3 environmental trigger)

<span id="carpentry-of-brass"></span>
=== '''Carpentry of Brass''' ===

MuHe(Te) 10

Pen +0 1/day

R: Personal, D: Sun, T: Individual

This power transforms the wood of the chest into brass matching the fittings on it. It is triggered by rapping on the chest seven times in rapid succession.

(Effect: Base 4, +2 Sun)

<span id="charm-versus-dampness"></span>
=== '''Charm Versus Dampness''' ===

ReAq 9

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Personal, D: Sun (constant), T: Room

This power slowly moves any liquids out of the chest over a period of minutes and prevents any liquids from slowly seeping or dripping into the chest (although the power is not strong enough to prevent liquids from being poured into the chest).

(Effect: Base 1, +2 Sun, +2 Room; Modifications +1 level 2 activations per day, +3 levels environmental trigger)

<span id="token-of-the-harvest-evening"></span>
=== ''Token of the Harvest Evening'' ===

This lesser enchanted device is a small wooden hourglass about the size of a chess piece bearing sulfur inlays. This device is enchanted with the following power.

<span id="freshness-of-the-harvest-evening"></span>
== '''Freshness of the Harvest Evening''' ==

CrHe 14

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Day (constant), T: Room

All plant material kept in the same room as the Token of the Harvest Evening is preserved from decay and rot until either the plant material or the token is removed from the room. Materials kept within the same room as the token for long periods of time will undergo Warping from the continuous magical effect. Lambert's family most frequently keeps the Token of the Harvest Evening inside the Granary Chest.

(Effect: Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Room; Modifications +1 two activations per day, +3 environmental trigger)

<span id="chapter-eight"></span>
=== ''Chapter Eight'' ===

<span id="maris-of-tytalus"></span>
= ''Maris of Tytalus'' =

'''Concept:''' A magus who lives at sea, constantly testing his magic against the raw fury of the elements, and searching beneath its waters for ancient magical sites.

Maris of Tytalus has lived in solitude for most of his Hermetic life, sailing the ''Paregro Mare'' from his island sanctuary of Slvolder located in the Oresund Straight. Maris felt cheated by the covenant lifestyle the Order encouraged, and the intentional and unintentional assistance it provided. As a Calliclean Tytalus, he felt the assistance provided by the ''Nomos'' undermined the great conflict. To grow as a magus, Maris felt he needed a rival that wasn't as flexible, fragile, or arbitrary as ''Nomi''. As soon as he was able, Maris decided to leave the ''Nomos'' for a more worthy adversary, ''Natura''. Looking to test himself against the worst nature could throw at him, Maris vowed never to accept aid from another individual until he had dominated his rival, ''Natura''. Maris now lives alone on the Baltic Sea, fending for himself without friend or teacher. When Maris is ashore, he spends most of his time in his lab, developing ways of easing his life on the ocean and overcoming the challenges ''Natura'' presents him with. While on the seas, Maris gathers supplies, tends to underwater gardens, and trawls the seas for ancient magical sites long lost under the waves where other magi are unable, or unwilling, to explore.

<span id="maris-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Maris at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per +1, Pre 0, Com –1, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 25 (25) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0 (1) '''Confidence:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Flawless Magic; Affinity: Creo, Affinity: Rego, Arcane Lore, Cautious Sorcerer, Free Study, Self-Confident*, Skilled Parens, Study Bonus; Plagued by Supernatural Enitity, Weak Spontaneous Magic; Cyclic Magic (Negative): During Low Tide, Fear: Twilight, Infamous (mad), Vow (Independence)

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Careful +3, Determined +2, Disciplined +1, Brave +1

'''Reputations:''' Dedicated (Tytalus) 1, Insane 4 '''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init: +1, Attack –, Defense +3, Damage –

''Fist:'' Init: +1, Attack +2, Defense +2, Damage +1

''Kick:'' Init: +0, Attack +2, Defense +1, Damage +4

''Harpoon:'' Init: +3, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage +8

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties:''' –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Scandinavia 1 (Baltic Sea), Artes Liberales 2 (astronomy), Athletics 1 (climbing), Awareness 1 (notice), Chirurgy 1 (first aid), Code of Hermes 1 (technicalities), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Etiquette 1 (Hermetic), Finesse 2 (precision), Fishing 2 (trap fishing), Great Weapon 1 (harpoon), Latin 4 (writing), Magic Lore 1 (creatures), Magic Theory 4 (enchanting items), Navigation 1 (sea), Norse 5 (nautical terms), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (history), Order of Odin Lore 1 (history), Parma Magica 2 (Aquam), Penetration 2 (Rego), Philosophiae 1 (natural), Profession: Sailor 2 (storms), Survival 2 (winter), Swim 2 (diving), Tytalus Lore 1 (philosophies)

'''Arts: Cr''' 10, '''In''' 5, '''Mu''' 5, '''Pe''' 5, '''Re''' 5, '''An''' 5, '''Aq''' 5, '''Au''' 5, '''Co''' 1, '''He''' 5, '''Ig''' 5, '''Im''' 1, '''Me''' 1, '''Te''' 1, '''Vi''' 1

<span id="ormurin-langi"></span>
=== ''Ormurin Langi'' ===

''Ormurin Langi'' or &quot;The Long Serpent&quot; is an old ballad about King Olaf Tryggvason, who violently brought Christianity to Norway. In the tale, King Tryggvason's fleet is attacked by a massive force from his enemies, the Swedish and Norwegian kings. Tryggvason's armada, although outnumbered, violently opposes and eventually repulses the two opposing fleets. However, Tryggvason's flagship, the ''Long Serpent'', is critically damaged in a third attack by his countryman, Eiríkr Hákonarson. Knowing that his ship is doomed, Tryggvason and his crew jump overboard into the frigid waters never to be seen again.

This great battle is said to have taken place in the Oresund Straight, near the isle of Slvolder. The isle, however, was lost to history. Until, that is, Maris stumbled across it during a particularly nasty storm that was unaffected by his magical protections. Located in a magical regio, the island of Slvolder is shrouded in mist, only opening when someone near is truly in peril of being lost to the sea. There is no other known way of accessing the island. Taking advantage of the magical aura the isle possessed, Maris set up a permanent lab on Slvolder to use as a base of operations. The nature of Slvolder's regio proves to be quite an asset to Maris' cause, preventing him from returning unless he is truly failing in his rivalry with ''Natura''. Each time Maris returns to Slvolder, he has learned a valuable lesson, and can use the island's resources to overcome the challenges he failed. The day Maris can no longer return to Slvolder, he will consider his vow fulfilled.

'''Twilight Scars:''' None

'''Equipment:''' Various seafaring equipment, as well as tools for repairs and fishing.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0) '''Spells Known:'''

''Soothe the Ferocious Bear'' (ReAn 10/+13): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+8): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Comfort the Drenched Caster'' (PeAq 5/+13): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Cloak of the Duck's Feathers'' (ReAq 5/+13): Mastery 1 (silent casting)

''Air's Ghostly Form'' (CrAu 5/+18): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Wind at the Back'' (ReAu 5/+13): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+14): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''In Christ's Footsteps'' (ReCo 5/+9): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Conjure the Sturdy Vine'' (CrHe 5/+13): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+18): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Hunt for the Wild Herb'' (InHe 5/+13): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Palm of Flame'' (CrIg 5/+18): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Repel Winter's Clutches'' (CrIg 5/+18): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Lamp Without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+18): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+8): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Taste of the Spices and Herbs'' (MuIm 5/+9): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Eyes of the Eons'' (InTe 10/+9): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Supple Iron and Rigid Rope'' (MuTe 10/+9): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''The Invisible Glass Worker'' (ReTe 4/+9): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''The Unseen Porter'' (ReTe 10/+9): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Sense of Magical Power'' (InVi 2/+9): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Scales of the Magical Weight'' (InVi 5/+9): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Sense the Nature of Vis'' (InVi 5/+9): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

'''Appearance:''' Maris is a gruff, weathered man of Nordic descent. He keeps himself in a practical, maintainable appearance, with hair uncut, and often with a month or more growth of beard.

'''Sigil:''' When Maris casts a spell, he grasps at ethereal threads connecting him to his target, weaving them into a desired effect. His voting token is a snowflake bound in a spiral.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-36"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="maris-15-years"></span>
=== ''Maris +15 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per +1, Pre 0, Com –1, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 40 (36)

'''Warping Score:''' 3 (5) '''Confidence:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Flawless Magic, Affinity: Creo, Affinity: Rego, Arcane Lore, Cautious Sorcerer, Free Study, Self-Confident*, Skilled Parens, Study Bonus; Plagued by Supernatural Entity, Weak Spontaneous Magic; Cyclic Magic (Negative): During Low Tide, Fear: Twilight, Infamous (mad), Vow (Independence)

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Careful +3, Determined +2, Disciplined +1, Brave +1

'''Reputations:''' Dedicated (Tytalus) 1, Insane 4 '''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init: +1, Attack –, Defense +3, Damage –

''Fist:'' Init: +1, Attack +2, Defense +2, Damage +1

''Kick:'' Init: +0, Attack +2, Defense +1, Damage +4

''Harpoon:'' Init: +3, Attack +5, Defense +3,

Damage +8

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties:''' –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Scandinavia 1 (Baltic Sea), Artes Liberales 2 (astronomy), Athletics 1 (climbing), Awareness 1 (notice), Chirurgy 1 (first aid), Code of Hermes 1 (technicalities), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Etiquette 1 (Hermetic), Finesse 2 (precision), Fishing 2 (trap fishing), Great Weapon 1 (harpoon), Latin 4 (writing), Magic Lore 1 (creatures), Magic Theory 4 (enchanting items), Navigation 1 (sea), Norse 5 (nautical terms), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (history), Order of Odin Lore 1 (history), Parma Magica 2 (Aquam), Penetration 2 (Rego), Philosophiae 1 (natural), Profession: Sailor 2 (storms), Survival 2 (winter), Swim 2 (diving), Tytalus Lore 1 (philosophies)

'''Arts: Cr''' 20, '''In''' 8, '''Mu''' 10, '''Pe''' 7, '''Re''' 20, '''An''' 5, '''Aq''' 10, '''Au''' 10, '''Co''' 6, '''He''' 5, '''Ig''' 5, '''Im''' 4, '''Me''' 2, '''Te''' 5, '''Vi''' 5

'''Twilight Scars:''' None

'''Equipment:''' ''Paregro Mare,'' various seafaring equipment, tools for repairs and fishing.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Soothe the Ferocious Bear'' (ReAn 10/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Comfort the Drenched Caster'' (PeAq 5/+20): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Cloak of the Duck's Feathers'' (ReAq 5/+33): Mastery 1 (silent casting)

''Air's Ghostly Form'' (CrAu 5/+33): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Wind at the Back'' (ReAu 5/+33): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+29): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''Physician's Eye'' (InCo 5/+17): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+18): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''In Christ's Footsteps'' (ReCo 5/+29): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Conjure the Sturdy Vine'' (CrHe 5/+28): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Hunt for the Wild Herb'' (InHe 5/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Palm of Flame'' (CrIg 5/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Repel Winters Clutches'' (CrIg 5/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Lamp Without Flame'' (CrIg 10)/28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+15): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Taste of the Spices and Herbs'' (MuIm 5/+17): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Eyes of the Eons'' (InTe 10/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Supple Iron and Rigid Rope'' (MuTe 10/+18): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''The Invisible Glass Worker'' (ReTe 4/+28): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''The Unseen Porter'' (ReTe 10/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Sense of Magical Power'' (InVi 2/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Scales of the Magical Weight'' (InVi 5/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Sense the Nature of Vis'' (InVi 5/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

'''Appearance:''' Maris is a gruff, weathered man of Nordic descent. He keeps himself in a practical, maintainable appearance, with hair uncut, and often with a month or more growth of beard. Due to his lengthy excursions underwater, Maris almost constantly smells of salt and the ocean, and often has bits of seaweed and other bits of debris stuck about him. Living on the seas keeps Maris far more muscular and in

<span id="magi-of-hermes-37"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

shape than most of his fellow magi, who often let their physical capabilities slacken in favor of more intellectual advances. Combined with Maris' Norse heritage, he can be quite an imposing sight when others catch a glimpse of him through the morning fogs.

'''Activities in the last 15 Years''': It didn't take long after his full initiation into the Order for Maris' philosophies to come to light. After only five years of living the covenant lifestyle, Maris decided to leave and forge his own way. After spending five years out at sea alone, the ''Paregro Mare'' was beached during a horrendous storm that seemed to have a life of its own. Maris had washed up on the shores of Slvolder*,* exhausted and near death. Here he lived for another five years until he thought he had perfected his Arts enough to tempt ''Natura'' once again. During this time, he crafted for himself a longevity ritual, with a score of 8. (For experience purposes, time spent on the boat is split between exposure and practice of relevant abilities; time spent on the island is used for lab work, studying vis, etc.)

<span id="maris-30-years"></span>
=== ''Maris +30 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per +1, Pre 0, Com –1, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 55 (45) '''Decrepitude:''' 0

'''Warping Score:''' 4 (11)

'''Confidence:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Flawless Magic, Affinity: Creo, Affinity: Rego, Arcane Lore, Cautious Sorcerer, Free Study, Self-Confident*, Skilled Parens, Study Bonus; Plagued by Supernatural Entity, Weak Spontaneous Magic; Cyclic Magic (Negative): During Low Tide, Fear: Twilight, Infamous (mad), Vow (Independence)

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Careful +3, Determined +2, Disciplined +1, Brave +1

'''Reputations:''' Dedicated (Tytalus) 1, Insane 4 '''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init: +1, Attack –, Defense +3, Damage –

''Fist: Init:'' +1, Attack +2, Defense +2, Damage +1

''Kick: Init:'' +0, Attack +2, Defense +1, Damage +4

''Harpoon:'' Init: +3, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage +8

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties:''' –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Scandinavia 2 (Baltic Sea), Artes Liberales 2 (astronomy), Athletics 2 (climbing), Awareness 2 (notice), Chirurgy 1 (first aid), Code of Hermes 1 (technicalities), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Etiquette 1 (Hermetic), Finesse 4 (precision), Fishing 2 (trap fishing), Great Weapon 2 (harpoon), Latin 4 (writing), Magic Lore 2 (creatures), Magic Theory 5 (enchanting items), Navigation 2 (sea), Norse 5 (nautical terms), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (history), Order of Odin Lore 1 (history), Parma Magica 2 (Aquam), Penetration 2 (Rego), Philosophiae 2 (natural), Profession: Sailor 2 (storms), Survival 2 (winter), Swim 2 (diving), Tytalus Lore 1 (philosophies)

'''Arts: Cr''' 20, '''In''' 12, '''Mu''' 20, '''Pe''' 12, '''Re''' 20, '''An''' 5, '''Aq''' 10, '''Au''' 10, '''Co''' 11, '''He''' 12, '''Ig''' 5, '''Im''' 4, '''Me''' 2, '''Te''' 11, '''Vi''' 5

'''Twilight Scars:''' Maris' hair is slightly animate and tends to wiggle around as if by its own volition.

'''Equipment:''' ''Paregro Mare,'' various seafaring equipment, tools for repairs and fishing.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0) '''Spells Known:'''

''Soothe the Ferocious Bear'' (ReAn 10/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Comfort the Drenched Caster'' (PeAq 5/+20): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Cloak of the Duck's Feathers'' (ReAq 5/+33): Mastery 1 (silent casting)

''Air's Ghostly Form'' (CrAu 5/+33): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Wind at the Back'' (ReAu 5/+33): Mastery 1 (multiple casting) ''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+29): Mastery 1 (mul-

tiple casting) ''Physician's Eye'' (InCo 5/+17): Mastery 1 (fast

casting) ''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+18): Mastery 1

(quiet casting) ''In Christ's Footsteps'' (ReCo 5/+29): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Conjure the Sturdy Vine'' (CrHe 5/+28): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Hunt for the Wild Herb'' (InHe 5/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Palm of Flame'' (CrIg 5/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Repel Winter's Clutches'' (CrIg 5/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Lamp Without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+15): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Taste of the Spices and Herbs'' (MuIm 5/+17): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Eyes of the Eons'' (InTe 10/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Supple Iron and Rigid Rope'' (MuTe 10/+18): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''The Invisible Glass Worker'' (ReTe 4/+28): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''The Unseen Porter'' (ReTe 10/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Sense of Magical Power'' (InVi 2/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Scales of the Magical Weight'' (InVi 5/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Sense the Nature of Vis'' (InVi 5/+16): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

'''Appearance:''' Living on the seas keeps Maris far more muscular and in shape than most of his fellow magi, who often let their physical capabilities slacken in favor of more intellectual advances.

'''Activities in the last 15 Years''': Maris spent a decade out at sea, perfecting his system of hunting down magical treasures claimed by the deep, and learning. Once again a powerful storm nearly claimed Maris and the ''Paregro Mare'', sucking them down in a huge vortex. Only intervention by a school of helpful merfolk saved Maris and his ship. Again returned to the island of Slvolder, Maris continued his work in overcoming each challenge ''Natura'' could muster. (Experience is split with ten years out at sea, five on the island.)

<span id="maris-45-years"></span>
=== ''Maris +45 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per +1, Pre 0, Com –1, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 70 (59) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 (1) '''Warping Score:''' 6 (10) '''Confidence:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Flawless Magic, Affinity: Creo, Affinity: Rego, Arcane Lore, Cautious Sorcerer, Free Study, Self-Confident*, Skilled Parens, Study Bonus; Plagued by Supernatural Entity, Weak Spontaneous Magic; Cyclic Magic (Negative): During Low Tide, Fear: Twilight, Infamous (mad), Vow (Independence)

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Careful +3, Determined

+2, Disciplined +1, Brave +1 '''Reputations:''' Dedicated (Tytalus) 1, Insane 4 '''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init: +1, Attack –, Defense +3, Damage –

''Fist: Init:'' +1, Attack +2, Defense +2, Damage +1

''Kick: Init:'' +0, Attack +2, Defense +1, Damage +4

''Harpoon:'' Init: +3, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage +8

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties:''' –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Scandinavia 2 (Baltic Sea), Artes Liberales 2 (astronomy), Athletics 2 (climbing), Awareness 2 (notice), Chirurgy 1 (first aid), Code of Hermes 1 (technicalities), Concentration 3 (spell concentration), Etiquette 1 (Hermetic), Finesse 3 (precision), Fishing 2 (trap fishing), Great Weapon 2 (harpoon), Latin 4 (writing), Magic Lore 2 (creatures), Magic Theory 6 (enchanting items), Navigation 2 (sea), Norse 5 (nautical terms), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (history), Order of Odin Lore 1 (history), Parma Magica 2 (Aquam), Penetration 2 (Rego), Philosophiae 1 (natural), Profession: Sailor 3 (storms), Survival 3 (winter), Swim 2 (diving), Tytalus Lore 1 (philosophies)

'''Arts: Cr''' 20, '''In''' 13, '''Mu''' 20, '''Pe''' 12, '''Re''' 20, '''An''' 6, '''Aq''' 10, '''Au''' 10, '''Co''' 11, '''He''' 14, '''Ig''' 6, '''Im''' 9, '''Me''' 2, '''Te''' 12, '''Vi''' 6

'''Twilight Scars:''' Maris' hair is slightly animate and tends to wiggle around as if by its own volition. Also, shadows cast by Maris fall toward the source of light instead of away from it.

'''Equipment:''' ''Paregro Mare,'' various seafaring equipment, tools for repairs and fishing.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Securing the Harvest'' (ReAn 4/+29): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Soothe the Ferocious Bear'' (ReAn 10/+29: Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Sense the Tide's Boundaries'' (InAq 25/+21): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Comfort the Drenched Caster'' (PeAq 5/+25): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Cloak of the Duck's Feathers'' (ReAq 5/+33): Mastery 1 (silent casting)

''Air's Ghostly Form'' (CrAu 5/+33): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Wind at the Back'' (ReAu 5/+33): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+29): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''In Christ's Footsteps'' (ReCo 5/+34): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Grow the Bountiful Feast'' (CrHe 4/37 ): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Conjure the Sturdy Vine'' (CrHe 5/+37): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''Plant the Bountiful Feast'' (CrHe 20/+37): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+30): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Hunt for the Wild Herb'' (InHe 5/+30): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Palm of Flame'' (CrIg 5/+29): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Repel Winter's Clutches'' (CrIg 5/29): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Lamp Without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+29): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+25): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Taste of the Spices and Herbs'' (MuIm 5/+32): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Form the Hermetic Boundary'' (CrTe 25/35): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Eyes of the Eons'' (InTe 10/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Supple Iron and Rigid Rope'' (MuTe 10/+35): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''The Invisible Glass Worker'' (ReTe 4/+35): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''The Unseen Porter'' (ReTe 10/+35): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Scales of the Magical Weight'' (InVi 5/+22): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Sense of Magical Power'' (InVi 2/+22): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Sense the Nature of Vis'' (InVi 5/+22): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

'''Appearance:''' Due to his lengthy excursions underwater, Maris almost constantly smells of salt and the ocean, and often has bits of seaweed and other bits of debris stuck about him.

'''Activities in the last 15 Years''': Maris was once again thwarted in his goals when the storm that had so many times ruined his plans came again. This time a huge wave capsized the ''Paregro Mare'', spilling all of its supplies into the ocean. Injured during the storm, Maris drifted nearly a week without food until he beached on the shores of Slvolder. Angered and infuriated, Maris spent the next decade on Slvolder, swearing that when he next left the island, he would never return. (Experience is divided with five years aboard ship and ten on the island.)

<span id="maris-60-years"></span>
=== ''Maris +60 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per +1, Pre 0, Com –1, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 85 (63)

'''Warping Score:''' 8 (17) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 (2) '''Confidence:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Flawless Magic, Affinity: Creo, Affinity: Rego, Arcane Lore, Cautious Sorcerer, Free Study, Self-Confident*, Skilled Parens, Study Bonus; Plagued by Supernatural Entity, Weak Spontaneous Magic; Cyclic Magic (Negative): During Low Tide, Fear: Twilight, Infamous (mad), Vow (Independence)

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Careful +3, Determined +2, Disciplined +1, Brave +1

'''Reputations:''' Dedicated (Tytalus) 1, Insane 4 '''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init: +1, Attack –, Defense +3, Damage –

''Fist: Init:'' +1, Attack +2, Defense +2, Damage +1

''Kick: Init:'' +0, Attack +2, Defense +1, Damage +4

''Harpoon:'' Init: +3, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage +8

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties:''' –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Scandinavia 2 (Baltic Sea), Artes Liberales 2 (astronomy), Athletics 2 (climbing), Awareness 3 (notice),

<span id="magi-of-hermes-38"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

Chirurgy 1 (first aid), Code of Hermes 1 (technicalities), Concentration 3 (spell concentration), Etiquette 1 (Hermetic), Finesse 3 (precision), Fishing 3 (trap fishing), Great Weapon 2 (harpoon), Latin 4 (writing), Magic Lore 2 (creatures), Magic Theory 6 (enchanting items), Navigation 2 (sea), Norse 5 (nautical terms), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (history), Order of Odin Lore 1 (history), Parma Magica 2 (Aquam), Penetration 3 (Rego), Philosophiae 2 (natural), Profession: Sailor 3 (storms), Survival 3 (winter), Swim 3 (diving), Tytalus Lore 1 (philosophies)

'''Arts: Cr''' 20, '''In''' 17, '''Mu''' 20, '''Pe''' 15, '''Re''' 20, '''An''' 7, '''Aq''' 15, '''Au''' 15, '''Co''' 15, '''He''' 14, '''Ig''' 6, '''Im''' 15, '''Me''' 2, '''Te''' 13, '''Vi''' 8

'''Twilight Scars:''' Maris' hair is slightly animate and tends to wiggle around as if by its own volition. Also, shadows cast by Maris fall toward the source of light instead of away from it. A salt crust slowly forms on Maris' skin.

'''Equipment:''' ''Paregro Mare,'' various seafaring equipment, tools for repairs and fishing.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Securing the Harvest'' (ReAn 4/+30): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Soothe the Ferocious Bear'' (ReAn 10/+30): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Sense the Tide's Boundaries'' (InAq 25/+30): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Comfort the Drenched Caster'' (PeAq 5/+33): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Cloak of the Duck's Feathers'' (ReAq 5/+38): Mastery 1 (silent casting)

''Captured by Höðr's Shackles'' (ReAq 20/+38): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Air's Ghostly Form'' (CrAu 5/+28): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+32): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Wind at the Back'' (ReAu 5/+38): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''Swallowed by the Mist'' (ReAu 20/+38): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+28): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''In Christ's Footsteps'' (ReCo 5/+38): Mastery 1 (fast casting)

''Grow the Bountiful Feast'' (CrHe 4/+37): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Conjure the Sturdy Vine'' (CrHe 5/+37): Mastery 1 (multiple casting)

''Plant the Bountiful Feast'' (CrHe 20/+37): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Hunt for the Wild Herb'' (InHe 5/+34): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Probe Nature's Hidden Lore'' (InHe 4/+34): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Repel Winter's Clutches'' (CrIg 5/+29): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Palm of Flame'' (CrIg 5/+29): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Lamp Without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+29): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+35): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Taste of the Spices and Herbs'' (MuIm 5/+38): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Form the Hermetic Boundary'' (CrTe 25/+36): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Eyes of the Eons'' (InTe 10/+33): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Supple Iron and Rigid Rope'' (MuTe 10/+36): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''The Invisible Glass Worker'' (ReTe 4/+35): Mas-

tery 1 (multiple casting) ''The Unseen Porter'' (ReTe 10/+36): Mastery 1

(quiet casting) ''Sense of Magical Power'' (InVi 2/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Scales of the Magical Weight'' (InVi /+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

''Sense the Nature of Vis'' (InVi 5/+28): Mastery 1 (quiet casting)

'''Appearance:''' Maris, now beginning to feel the effects of age, is starting to look a bit thin. Years on the sea have taken their toll, weathering Maris' skin to almost resemble the stony shore.

'''Activities in the last 15 Years''': After his last encounter with ''Natura'', Maris was left scornful and angered. After spending longer than he ever had on the island, he once again ventured forth, swearing never to return. He used the ''Paregro Mare'' to seed underwater gardens for food supplies, and new items were forged and spells invented. The great plan had finally come together. Maris did set sail from Slvolder on the first day of the new year 1300. Maris has since been lost to the Order, without a single sighting of his ship in recent memory.

<span id="new-spells-6"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Maris has developed these spells during his self-imposed isolation.

<span id="animal-spells-5"></span>
=== ''Animal Spells'' ===

<span id="securing-the-harvest"></span>
==== '''Securing the Harvest''' ====

ReAn 4

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

This ward prevents any mundane pest from entering and absconding with the food growing within the protective boundary of the circle. If Maris finds that the ward has been bypassed and the food tampered with, it is an indication that something far more interesting than vermin has been in the area.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Ring)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-39"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="aquam-spells-2"></span>
=== ''Aquam Spells'' ===

<span id="sense-the-tides-boundaries"></span>
==== '''Sense the Tide's Boundaries''' ====

InAq 25

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

As ''Eyes of the Bat'', but senses the displacement of water to see in the ocean's depths. Since this spell isn't bound by the limitations of sight, it is often preferred when scouring the ocean depths where light does not reach.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Size)

<span id="captured-by-höðrs-shackles"></span>
=== '''Captured by Höðr's Shackles''' ===

ReAq 20

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Part

Instantaneously, a submerged target is imprisoned in a thick casing of ice. Due to ice's natural buoyancy, Maris often uses this spell to float something of value to the surface. If used against an opponent, the ice suffocates an individual, as well as causing +3 damage per round from cold. Note that the spell does not create ice; it only works on targets already immersed in water.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Part, +1 Size)

<span id="swallowed-by-the-mist"></span>
=== '''Swallowed by the Mist''' ===

ReAq 20

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

This spell turns the targeted section of water to mist, causing swimmers and ships alike to plummet to the ground while the mist rises up, and then the sea crashes down around them. Successfully targeting this attack requires a Perception + Finesse roll against an Ease Factor of 9 (6 if the target is smaller than a rowboat, as there is more leeway in the transformed area). Observers of this spell will often just see a large cloud of mist rise around the target, and the ship will simply be gone.

(Base 3, + 2 Voice, +1 Part, +2 Size)

<span id="herbam-spells-5"></span>
=== ''Herbam Spells'' ===

<span id="grow-the-bountiful-feast"></span>
=== '''Grow the Bountiful Feast''' ===

CrHe 4

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

This spell ensures that all plants within

the circle grow healthily, and produce a good crop. The plants still mature normally, but when it comes time to harvest, all will produce the maximum amount of crops, of the finest quality the plant can produce.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Ring)

<span id="plant-the-bountiful-feast"></span>
==== '''Plant the Bountiful Feast''' ====

CrHe 20

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Group, Ritual

This ritual creates a number of edible or food-producing plants. The plants appear fully mature, but still need time to produce a crop. Maris' version of this spell produces Irish moss.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Group, +1 Size, ''ritual'')

<span id="ignem-spells-3"></span>
=== ''Ignem Spells'' ===

<span id="repel-winters-clutches"></span>
=== '''Repel Winter's Clutches''' ===

CrIg 5

R: Touch, D Conc, T: Ind

Rapidly warms the target with an internal heat. This can be used to quickly defrost an object, or, if applied quickly enough, to save an individual from freezing to death. When using this spell in conjunction with treating hypothermia, the Medicine roll receives a bonus of +5.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc)

<span id="terram-spells-3"></span>
=== ''Terram Spells'' ===

<span id="form-the-hermetic-boundary"></span>
==== '''Form the Hermetic Boundary''' ====

CrTe 25

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

Forms a large, stone circle where cast. The circle, which is nine paces across, rises out of the ground to produce a level, stone surface that is a foot high, and several inches thick. Maris likes to use this spell as a base to set up underwater gardens, which are an invaluable source of food.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +3 Moon, +2 Size)

<span id="enchanted-items-6"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Maris has designed the following items.

<span id="ever-tempting-trap"></span>
=== ''Ever-Tempting Trap'' ===

Every sailor knows the fickleness of the sea. One day fish are leaping into your nets, while the next the ocean is as barren as any desert. These traps help keep the holds full, but even with magical assistance, you can't catch fish that aren't there. Each trap must be tailored to a particular kind of prey; Maris has made one for cod. When using the appropriate trap to catch the right prey, the Ever-Tempting Trap gives a bonus of +5 to fishing checks.

<span id="sight-of-wounded-prey"></span>
==== '''Sight of Wounded Prey''' ====

CrIm 9

Pen +0, Constant Effect R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

This effect creates the illusion of a certain bait inside the trap, allowing it to be used continually without needing to restock or bait going bad. The bait both appears real and puts out the proper scent. Any predator looking to feed will be almost assuredly be attracted to this item. The scent must be of a particular bait, and will only attract prey normally attracted to that scent.

(Base 3, +2 Sun; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set)

<span id="eyeglass-of-nereus"></span>
=== ''Eyeglass of Nereus'' ===

This rusty eyepiece is essential to navigating the dreadful weather conditions of the northern seas, as well as getting the drop on a foe in a well-placed fog.

<span id="true-sight-of-the-air"></span>
==== '''True Sight of the Air''' ====

InAu 25 Pen +0, 24/day R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Vision As ''True Sight of the Air'' ('''ArM5''', page 127).

<span id="magi-of-hermes-40"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

(Effect: Base 1, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +4 Vision; +5 24/day, +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="eyes-of-the-eagle"></span>
=== '''Eyes of the Eagle''' ===

InIm 35 Pen +0, 24/day R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Vision As ''Eyes of the Eagle'' ('''ArM5''', page 145). (Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +4 Vision; +5 24/day, +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="foul-weathers-bane"></span>
=== ''Foul Weather's Bane'' ===

Living in the Baltic Sea is dreadful and dangerous. This cloak makes life a little more bearable. Keeping the wearer warm and dry, this cloak gives a +5 modifier to soak versus exposure. Also, the cloak will not freeze, nor will ice build up upon the cloak or the wearer.

<span id="cloak-of-the-ducks-feathers"></span>
==== '''Cloak of the Duck's Feathers''' ====

ReAq 9

Pen +0, Constant Effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

As ''Cloak of the Duck's Feathers'' ('''ArM5''', page 124).

(Base 2, +2 Sun, +1 Touch; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set)

<span id="comfort-the-weary-traveler"></span>
==== '''Comfort the Weary Traveler''' ====

CrIg 9

Pen +0, Constant Effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Warms the wearer, shielding him from winter's harshest weather.

Base 2, +2 Sun, +1 Touch; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set)

<span id="gorget-of-salty-breath"></span>
=== ''Gorget of Salty Breath'' ===

This gorget allows the wearer to function normally underwater. Water turns to breathable air, the body strengthens to withstand the crushing weight of the deep, and the voice of the wearer will be carried far and wide.

MuAq(Au) 24

Pen +0, Constant Effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

As ''Lungs of the Fish'' ('''ArM5''', page 122). However, this still does not allow you enough air to fully vocalize the required words to cast spells underwater. See ''Voices in the Ocean'' side bar.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set)

<span id="surviving-the-deep"></span>
==== '''Surviving the Deep''' ====

MuCo 30

Pen +0, 1/day

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

This effect strengthens the body, increasing its mass and allowing it to resist the great pressures of the deep ocean, as well as providing a +3 to soak. See the Voices in the Ocean sidebar.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="the-krakens-song"></span>
==== '''The Kraken's Song''' ====

MuIm 8

Pen +0, Constant Effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

This simple effect changes any vocalizations made by the caster into a loud highpitched click, which allows the vocalizations of his Voice-Ranged spells to carry through the water. See ''Voices in the Ocean'' side bar.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set)

<span id="the-nailed-down-chamber-pot"></span>
=== ''The Nailed Down Chamber Pot'' ===

This unassuming chamber pot, nailed to the deck of the ''Paregro Mare'' (to avoid any &quot;accidents&quot; on the rolling seas), is probably the most-used item on the ship.

<span id="remove-the-unsightly-mess"></span>
==== '''Remove the Unsightly Mess''' ====

PeCo(Aq) 20

Pen +0, unlimited uses

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

All human waste, and all associated un-

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Aquam Req; +10 unlimited uses)

<span id="neptunes-anchors"></span>
=== ''Neptune's Anchors'' ===

This is a series of small weights attached to a long length of rope and dragged behind the ''Paregro Mare.'' Using a system akin to modern trawl fishing, Maris scours the seas for sources of magical power. When the ''Paregro Mare'' comes near one of these underwater sites, the rope pulls tight as the anchor points the way*.* With a successful Intelligence + Navigation roll against an Ease Factor of 9, the user can nail down the location of a discovered site with enough accuracy to make a dive.

<span id="guide-the-seeker"></span>
==== '''Guide the Seeker''' ====

ReHe 16 Pen +0, Constant Effect R: Per, D: Mom, T: Ind

This effect pulls the rope towards the sensed vis, much like a magnet. The taut guide rope may be then followed to the source of the vis.

(Base 3; +3 linked trigger, +10 unlimited uses/day)

<span id="seek-the-enchanted-waters"></span>
==== '''Seek the Enchanted Waters''' ====

InVi 19 Pen +0, Constant Effect R: Vision, D: Sun, T: Ind This effect detects nearby vis sources. (Base 1, +4 Vision, +2 Sun, +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set)

<span id="naiads-cask"></span>
=== ''Naiad's Cask'' ===

With this device, fresh water is just an arm's length away. After being filled with sea water, the Naiad's Cask will dispense clean, fresh drinking water.

<span id="cleanse-gaias-tears"></span>
==== '''Cleanse Gaia's Tears''' ====

PeTe(Aq) 20 Pen +0, 24/day R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

<span id="voices-in-the-ocean"></span>
=== ''Voices in the Ocean'' ===

Humans are not aquatic creatures by nature, and Hermetic magic was certainly not designed with submerged use in mind. There are several fundamental differences between casting a spell underwater and casting a spell in the open air. Unless aided by magical means, no words and only subtle gestures may be used to cast spells while submerged, accruing the normal casting penalties. Note that sound has a difficult time leaving the water, and Voice-Range spells cast while submerged can only affect targets in, or touching the surface of, the water. Drowning is not the only threat an adventurous magus needs to worry about. The great weight of the ocean can crush unsuspecting magi. After each 10 meters of descent, a character looses one tenth of his current depth minus soak (extra soak from armor does not apply) in Fatigue Levels.

''Example: Hydas is diving toward a library, lost to the deep centuries ago. At a depth of 50 meters, Hydas looses 5 – 3 (Hydas' soak) = 2 Fatigue Levels. If Hydas descends another ten meters, he will lose three more Fatigue Levels, and be in real trouble.''

All salt within the container is destroyed, even if in solution, leaving drinkable fresh water. Any other impurities will remain.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Mineral, +1 Complex; +5 24/day)

<span id="roll-of-endless-rope"></span>
=== ''Roll of Endless Rope'' ===

This incredibly useful device manifests itself as a long piece of vine, wrapped around a wooden spindle. When the end of the plant is tugged, ten feet of vine unwraps itself from the spindle. This vine is strong and sturdy as a good piece of rope, but the vine is not permanent, and all rigging generally must be replaced every duration. The grown vine may be cut off and used without destroying the device, as long as the original amount of vine remains intact (five feet coiled around the spindle).

<span id="concoct-cordage"></span>
=== '''Concoct Cordage''' ===

CrHe 15

Pen +0, unlimited uses

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

The attached vine grows an additional ten feet per activation.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +3 Moon; +10 unlimited uses)

<span id="shroud-of-the-healed-body"></span>
=== ''Shroud of the Healed Body'' ===

Sickness and injury are ever-present risks on a ship, and with a one-man crew, a very serious threat. This shroud, emblazoned with the cross of St. John, keeps a man in health, and helps heal him when sick or injured.

<span id="hospitallers-vigil"></span>
==== '''Hospitaller's Vigil''' ====

CrCo 24

Pen +0, Constant Effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

If the Shroud of the Healed Body is worn for the duration of a wound or sickness, the wearer adds +12 to his recovery checks.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set)

<span id="tryggvasons-chart"></span>
=== ''Tryggvason's Chart'' ===

This large circle of cured leather is attached to the ''Paregro Mare's'' navigation console. Attached to the map is a weighted leader line that's thrown off the back of the ship. On the map appears a real-time depiction of the surrounding ocean and all the information a sailor could need, including tides, depth information, and other ships. As long as the notation this map provides is understood by the sailor, he gets an additional +5 to his Navigation rolls.

<span id="reveal-the-oceans-secrets"></span>
==== '''Reveal the Ocean's Secrets''' ====

InAq 19

Pen +0, Constant Effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

''Reveal the Ocean's Secrets'' senses the motion, speed, and boundaries of the ocean up to 1500 feet in all directions. Tides, currents, obstacles, depth, and other such information are constantly gathered by this spell.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part, +2 Size, +1 Complexity; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set)

Pen +0, Constant Effect R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

This effect produces an image of the information gathered by ''Reveal the Ocean's Secrets'' in the form of a constantly updating, highly detailed map. The map uses a form of notation developed by Maris, and is not easily understood by those who are not taught their meanings.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set, +3 linked trigger)

<span id="talisman-paregro-mare"></span>
= ''Talisman: Paregro Mare'' =

Built by Maris' own hand, the ''Paregro Mare's'' design is based on an amalgam of the Knarr-type long ship, and the later Buss-type vessel. The ship itself is oar-less, foregoing the shallow draft in favor of a lower deck, like the Buss. Supporting only a single mast with one sail, the ''Paregro Mare'' has room for about 30 tons of cargo and can reach up to 10 knots under favorable conditions. It holds a cramped sanctum below deck, and Maris has practically lived on this vessel ever since leaving the Novgorod Tribunal. Enchanted as his talisman soon after its completion, the ''Paregro Mare'' has had several effects instilled within it, as well as having had several enchanted devices attached to it that allow it to be sailed by Maris alone, and to withstand the worst man or nature can throw at it.

'''Attunements'''

* +4 Affect Currents
* +4 Affect Dead Wood
* +4 Aquam
* +4 Banish Weather Phenomenon
* +4 Create/Control Winds
* +7 Protection from Storms

<span id="save-our-ship"></span>
=== ''Save Our Ship'' ===

PeAq 27 Pen +0, 3/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Room

When ''Save Our Ship'' takes effect, all water in the hold of the ship is destroyed. This leaves everything in the hold slightly dehydrated, and destroys any drinking water, wine, or other liquids stored within.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Room; +2 3/day)

<span id="eye-of-the-storm"></span>
=== ''Eye of the Storm'' ===

ReAq 8

Pen +0, Constant Effect R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

All waves, crests, or other masses of water (mundane or otherwise) break and part around the ''Paregro Mare.'' While sailing the ''Paregro Mare,'' the Ease Factor for sailing rolls will not be increased due to rough seas or stormy weather. However, sailing through strong winds will increase the Ease Factor as normal. This effect also makes it extremely difficult to swamp the boat.

(Base 2, +2 Sun; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set)

<span id="ward-the-drowning-waves"></span>
=== ''Ward the Drowning Waves'' ===

ReAq 33

Pen +0, 6/day

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Room

Upon activation, ''Ward the Drowning Waves'' expels all water from the lower hold of the ship and keeps it out. This serves as a temporary fix long enough to conduct some quick repairs.

(Base 5, +1 Touch. +1 Conc, +2 Room; +3 6/day, +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="control-the-reckless-vessel"></span>
=== ''Control the Reckless Vessel'' ===

ReAq(Au) 35

Pen +0, 24/day

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

This effect fills the ''Paregro Mare's'' sails with a stiff breeze, as well as controlling the currents around the hull of the boat to drive the ''Paregro Mare'' with a speed and agility unknown to other boats of this type. This effect can be maintained while Maris is elsewhere, although it will only keep its last heading and speed. Controlling the winds and the seas allows the ''Paregro Mare'' to accomplish feats most other sailors can only dream of. The ''Paregro Mare'' can even maintain course

Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Size, + 1 Req.; +5 24/day, +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="hull-of-unbreakable-iron"></span>
=== ''Hull of Unbreakable Iron'' ===

MuHe (Te) 24 Pen +0, Constant Effect R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

The ''Paregro Mare's'' hull has been enchanted to be as hard as metal. The thick timbers of the hull provide protection from accidental collisions, punctures, and damage of all types. The ''Paregro Mare's'' hull is immune to ramming, and if another captain is foolish enough to try, he will successfully wreck his own ship if he fails the contested Int + Profession roll by more than his own Profession skill.

(Base 4, +2 Sun, +2 Size; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set)

<span id="helios-companionship"></span>
=== ''Helios' Companionship'' ===

CrIg 24

Pen +0, Constant Effect

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Room

The lower deck of the ''Paregro Mare'' has been enchanted to produce enough light to brighten the hold to the equivalent of torchlight, and to heat it to be as warm as a pleasant summer's eve. Not only is this extremely convenient as well as comfortable, if you are using the optional rules from ''Covenants'' this grants the laboratory the Free Supernatural Virtue: ''Magical Lighting (Superior)'' and the Free Supernatural Virtue: ''Magical Heating (Superior)'' (pages 118-119).

Base 3, +2 Sun; +2 Room, +1 Heat; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger: sunrise/set)

<span id="chapter-nine"></span>
=== ''Chapter Nine'' ===

<span id="marcus-of-criamon"></span>
= ''Marcus of Criamon'' =

'''Concept:''' This giant-blooded magus seeks to create living beings by combining the features of two or more existing creatures, with the minotaur as his final goal.

Marcus Tauros of Criamon's immense size has always been a source of great embarrassment to him, and he hates to draw attention to himself. He was mercilessly (and often brutally) teased as a child, and was supremely grateful to his master, both for taking him away from those who feared his Gift, and for and teaching him a way to make himself better. He still gets very angry when others draw attention to his height, even in a non-derogatory manner. His master was an anatomist and taught him much about the workings of the body, and cultivated his natural aptitude with the various organs. When Marcus casts a spell, his Warped magic causes his internal organs to glow so brightly they can be seen through his skin. Which organ is affected is determined by the Form of the spell used: Animal &amp; Auram — liver; Aquam &amp; Imaginem — brain; Corpus &amp; Vim — heart; Herbam &amp; Terram — spleen; Ignem &amp; Mentem — gallbladder.

During his initiation into the mysteries of House Criamon, he received a vision of his past life as a Minoan priest on the island of Crete, and saw himself create the monstrous minotaur from a man and a sacred bull. He has devoted his learning to recreating that act, believing that if he can successfully call across the Wheel of Time to his former life, he can improve his perceived deficiencies in body and mind, and make a better self. When he completes this research, it is likely that he will overcome his Low Self-Esteem Flaw and gain a Confidence Score of 1. His single-mindedness in pursuing his obsession has meant that he has neglected many of the typical significators of Hermetic maturity, such as a familiar or apprentice, and he only began his talisman after forty years as a magus.

<span id="marcus-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Marcus at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +3, Per +2, Pre 0, Com –1, Str +3, Sta +3, Dex –2, Qik –1

'''Size:''' +2 '''Age:''' 24 (24) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Giant Blood, Major Magical Focus (organs); Affinity with Animal, Animal Ken, The Enigma*, Improved Characteristics, Inventive Genius; Driven, Low Self-Esteem; Ability Block (Martial Abilities), Oversensitive (teasing), Poor Eyesight, Warped Magic

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Brave +3, Obsessed +3, Angry +2, Outgoing –2

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense –1, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +3

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–7), –3 (8–14), –5 (15– 21), Incapacitated (22–28), Dead (29+)

'''Abilities:''' Animal Ken 1 (cattle), Artes Liberales 2 (logical traps), Athletics 1 (escape), Awareness 1 (ambushes), Chirurgy 2 (internal surgery), Cretan Lore 2

(ruins), Enigmatic Wisdom 1 (mazes), Finesse 1 (Animal), Greek 5 (Cretan), House Criamon Lore 1 (Corpus experts), Latin 4 (Hermetic), Magic Lore 1 (hybrid beasts), Magic Theory 4 (original research), Parma Magica 1 (Corpus), Penetration 1 (Animal), Stealth 1 (avoiding pursuers), Survival 2 (barren lands)

'''Arts: Cr''' 8**, In** 0**, Mu** 8**, Pe** 0**, Re** 0**; An** 10**, Aq** 0**, Au** 0**, Co** 8**, He** 0**, Ig** 0**, Im** 0**, Me** 0**, Te** 0**, Vi** 0

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Peasant clothing

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0) '''Spells Known:'''

''True Rest of the Injured Brute'' (CrAn 20/+21)

''Beast of Outlandish Size'' (MuAn 15/+21)

''Growth of Creeping Things'' (MuAn 15/+21)

''Transformation of the Ravenous Beast to the Torpid Toad'' (MuAn 25/+21)

''Decay Fur and Hide'' (PeAn 10/+13)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+19)

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+27 <sup>F</sup> )

''Arm of the Infant'' (MuCo 20/+27 <sup>F</sup> )

F includes Magical Focus

'''Appearance:''' Marcus is massive; eight feet tall and broad with it. He dresses in simple clothing and invariably hunches his shoulders in a futile attempt to hide his size. He has an olive complexion and black hair, and wears a beard (but no mustache) trimmed close to his jaw line.

'''Sigil:''' Marcus' casting sigil is horns, normally in shadow or as a ghostly image. His voting sigil is a bronze bull's head.

<span id="marcus-15-years"></span>
=== ''Marcus +15 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +3, Per +2, Pre 0, Com –1, Str +3, Sta +3, Dex –2, Qik –1

'''Size:''' +2 '''Age:''' 39 (35) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 2 (4)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Giant Blood, Major Magical Focus (organs), Station of Differentiation of Seeming**, Station of True Sight**; Affinity with Animal, Animal Ken, The Enigma*, Improved Characteristics, Inventive Genius; Disfigurement**, Driven, Low Self-Esteem; Ability Block (Martial Abilities), Oversensitive (teasing), Poor Eyesight, Vow (live aptly)**, Warped Magic

\* House Virtue

\** Mystery Initiations and Ordeals

'''Personality Traits:''' Brave +3, Obsessed +3, Angry +2

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense +1, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +3

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–7), –3 (8–14), –5 (15– 21), Incapacitated (22–28), Dead (29+)

'''Abilities:''' Animal Ken 2 (cattle), Artes Liberales 2 (logical traps), Athletics 1 (escape), Awareness 1 (ambushes), Brawl 1 (dodge), Chirurgy 2 (internal surgery), Cretan Lore 2 (ruins), Enigmatic Wisdom 3 (mazes), Finesse 1 (Animal), Greek 5 (Cretan), House Criamon Lore 3 (Corpus experts), Latin 4 (Hermetic), Magic Lore 1 (hybrid beasts), Magic Theory 5 (original research), Parma Magica 2 (Corpus), Penetration 1 (Animal), Philosophiae 2 (animals), Stealth 1 (avoiding pursuers), Survival 2 (barren lands)

'''Arts: Cr''' 10**, In** 4**, Mu** 10**, Pe** 3**, Re** 3**; An** 13**, Aq** 3**, Au** 0**, Co** 9**, He** 0**, Ig** 0**, Im** 0**, Me** 4**, Te** 0**, Vi** 6

'''Twilight Scars:''' Marcus' shadow has horns on its head; the third and fourth fingers of each of his hands have fused together.

'''Equipment:''' Peasant clothing

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''True Rest of the Injured Brute'' (CrAn 20/+26)

''Worm of the Soil'' (CrAn 20/+26)

''Flight Perfected'' (CrAn 25/+26)

''Flight Divorced'' (CrAn 30/+36 <sup>F</sup> )

''Beast of Outlandish Size'' (MuAn 15/+26)

''Growth of Creeping Things'' (MuAn 15/+26)

''Transformation of the Ravenous Beast to the Torpid Toad'' (MuAn 25/+26)

''Decay Fur and Hide'' (PeAn 10/+15)

''Soothe the Ferocious Boar'' (ReAn 10/+19)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+22)

''Bushy Tail of the Branch-Dancer'' (MuCo(An) 5/+22)

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+31 <sup>F</sup> )

''Sure-Footedness of the Crag-Leaper'' (MuCo(An) 5/+22)

''Webbed Toes of the Pond-Dweller'' (MuCo(An) 5/+22)

''Arm of the Infant'' (MuCo 20/+31 <sup>F</sup> )

''Kiss of the Enigma'' (CrVi 15/+19) invented 3

times during research. F includes Magical Focus

'''Appearance:''' Marcus is massive; eight foot tall and broad with it. He dresses in simple clothing and invariably hunches his shoulders in a futile attempt to hide his size. He has an olive complexion and black hair, and wears a beard (but no mustache) trimmed close to his jaw line. The stigmata of the Path of Seem-

'''Activities in the last 15 years''': Three years after his Gauntlet, Marcus was initiated onto the Path of Seeming (''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'', pages 64–67), and eight years later he attained the second Station, that of True Sight. Each of these initiations took a season of his time. He has created his longevity ritual (a tattoo over his heart), and has spent two seasons stabilizing the results of his Original Research (he gained 9 breakthrough points in these 15 years). He has prepared the floor of his laboratory for enchantment, and invested one effect into it, which took him two seasons. He has invented or learned 145 levels of spells, and gained 115 experience points in Abilities and 130 in Arts.

<span id="marcus-30-years"></span>
=== ''Marcus +30 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +3, Per +2, Pre 0, Com –1, Str +3, Sta +3, Dex –2, Qik –1

'''Size:''' +2 '''Age:''' 54 (38) '''Decrepitude:''' 0

'''Warping Score:''' 3 (10)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Giant Blood, Major Magical Focus (organs), Station of Differentiation of Seeming**, Station of True Sight**, Station of Vivid Memories from Objects**; Affinity with Animal, Animal Ken, The Enigma*, Improved Characteristics, Inventive Genius; Disfigurement**, Driven, Pious**, Low Self-Esteem; Ability Block (Martial Abilities), Oversensitive (teasing), Poor Eyesight, Warped Magic

\* House Virtue

\** Mystery Initiations and Ordeals

'''Personality Traits:''' Brave +3, Obsessed +3, Angry +2

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense +1, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +7 (when the Mark of Protection on his belly is exposed)

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–7), –3 (8–14), –5 (15– 21), Incapacitated (22–28), Dead (29+)

'''Abilities:''' Animal Ken 2 (cattle), Artes Liberales 2 (logical traps), Athletics 1 (es-

cape), Awareness 1 (ambushes), Brawl 1 (dodge), Chirurgy 3 (internal surgery), Cretan Lore 2 (ruins), Enigmatic Wisdom 4 (mazes), Finesse 1 (Animal), Greek 5 (Cretan), House Criamon Lore 5 (Corpus experts), Latin 4 (Hermetic), Magic Lore 2 (hybrid beasts), Magic Theory 5 (original research), Parma Magica 3 (Corpus), Penetration 1 (Ani-

mal), Philosophiae 2 (animals), Stealth 1 (avoiding pursuers), Survival 2 (bar-

ren lands) '''Arts: Cr''' 11**, In** 6**, Mu** 11**, Pe** 4**, Re** 5**; An** 15**, Aq** 3**, Au** 3**, Co** 11**, He** 3**, Ig** 3**, Im** 5**, Me** 4**, Te** 3**, Vi** 8

'''Twilight Scars:''' Marcus' shadow has horns on its head; the third and fourth fingers of each of his hands have fused together; he leaves cloven footprints behind; his Gift attracts rather than repels flies.

'''Equipment:''' Peasant clothing, Canopic Jars, Mark of Protection

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0) '''Spells Known:'''

''True Rest of the Injured Brute'' (CrAn 20/+29)

''Worm of the Soil'' (CrAn 20/+29)

''Flight Perfected'' (CrAn 25/+29)

''Flight Divorced'' (CrAn 30/+40 <sup>F</sup> )

''Strength Extinguished'' (CrAn 30/+36 <sup>F</sup> )

''Strength Renewed'' (CrAn 35/+36 <sup>F</sup> )

''Beast of Outlandish Size'' (MuAn 15/+29)

''Growth of Creeping Things'' (MuAn 15/+29)

''The Beast Remade'' (MuAn(Co) 25/+25)

''Transformation of the Ravenous Beast to the Torpid Toad'' (MuAn 25/+29)

''Decay Fur and Hide'' (PeAn 10/+22)

''Blunt the Viper's Fangs'' (PeAn 15/+22)

''Soothe the Ferocious Boar'' (ReAn 10/+23)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+25)

''Bushy Tail of the Branch-Dancer'' (MuCo(An) 5/+25)

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+36 <sup>F</sup> )

''Slime of the Muck-Dweller'' (MuCo(An) 5/+25)

''Sure-Footedness of the Crag-Leaper'' (MuCo(An) 5/+25)

''Webbed Toes of the Pond-Dweller'' (MuCo(An) 5/+25)

''Arm of the Infant'' (MuCo 20/+36 <sup>F</sup> )

''Spirit of the Bull of Minos'' (MuCo(An) 20/+36 ), Ritual

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5 /+14)

''Kiss of the Enigma'' (CrVi 15/+22) invented 3

times during research F includes Magical Focus

'''Appearance:''' Marcus is massive; eight foot tall and broad with it. He dresses in simple clothing and invariably hunches his shoulders in a futile attempt to hide his size. He has an olive complexion and black hair, and wears a beard (but

<span id="magi-of-hermes-41"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

no mustache) trimmed close to his jaw line. The stigmata of the Path of Seeming have manifested as an interlocking labyrinth pattern centered around his forehead. When he performs magic, the stigma shifts and rotates as if charting his path through the maze.

'''Activities in the last 15 years''': During the last 15 years Marcus was initiated into the third station on the Path of Seeming, which took him a season. He has spent two seasons crafting four Canopic Jars as Lesser Enchanted items, and three seasons enchanting the tattoo on his abdomen. He instilled the second effect into his laboratory enchantment, which took one season. Marcus also spent two seasons investigating the Minoan labyrinth at Knossos, which lead him to several insights into their ancient magic (see Marcus' Original Research, later). He has now acquired a total of 25 breakthrough points, having spent two seasons stabilizing the successes of his studies. He has invented or learned 135 levels of spells, and gained 105 experience points in Abilities and 140 in Arts.

<span id="marcus-45-years"></span>
=== ''Marcus +45 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +3, Per +2, Pre 0, Com –1, Str +3, Sta +3, Dex –2, Qik –1

'''Size:''' +2 '''Age:''' 69 (43)

'''Decrepitude:''' 0

'''Warping Score:''' 4 (13)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Giant Blood, Major Magical Focus (organs), Station of Differentiation of Seeming**, Station of True Sight**, Station of Vivid Memories from Objects**; Affinity with Animal, Animal Ken, The Enigma*, Improved Characteristics, Inventive Genius; Disfigurement**, Driven, Pious**, Low Self-Esteem; Ability Block (Martial Abilities), Oversensitive (teasing), Poor Eyesight, Warped Magic

\* House Virtue

\** Mystery Initiations and Ordeals

'''Personality Traits:''' Brave +3, Obsessed +3, Angry +2

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack n/a, Defense +1, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +7 (when the Mark of Protection on his belly is exposed)

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–7), –3 (8–14), –5 (15– 21), Incapacitated (22–28), Dead (29+)

'''Abilities:''' Animal Ken 2 (cattle), Artes Liberales 2 (logical traps), Athletics 1 (escape), Awareness 2 (ambushes), Brawl 1 (dodge), Chirurgy 3 (internal surgery), Cretan Lore 2 (ruins), Enigmatic Wisdom 5 (mazes), Finesse 2 (Animal), Greek 5 (Cretan), House Criamon Lore 5 (Corpus experts), Latin 4 (Hermetic), Magic Lore 2 (hybrid beasts), Magic Theory 6 (original research), Parma Magica 4 (Corpus), Penetration 3 (Animal), Philosophiae 2 (animals), Stealth 1 (avoiding pursuers), Survival 2 (barren lands)

'''Arts: Cr''' 12**, In** 6**, Mu** 13**, Pe** 5**, Re** 8**; An** 16**, Aq** 5**, Au** 5**, Co** 13**, He** 4**, Ig** 5**, Im** 6**, Me** 5**, Te** 5**, Vi** 8

'''Twilight Scars:''' Marcus' shadow has horns on its head; the third and fourth fingers of each of his hands have fused together; he leaves cloven footprints behind; his Gift attracts rather than repels flies; when he experiences strong emotions everyone within seven paces must make appropriate Personality Trait rolls against an Ease Factor of 6 or experience the same emotion; he sneezes sparks in the presence of magic (this doesn't allow him to detect magic, although he usually can thanks to the second station of the Path of Seeming).

'''Equipment:''' Peasant clothing, Canopic Jars, Mark of Protection, Bucephalos talisman

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''True Rest of the Injured Brute'' (CrAn 20/+34 A)

''Worm of the Soil'' (CrAn 20/+34 A)

''Flight Perfected'' (CrAn 25/+34 A)

''Flight Divorced'' (CrAn 30/+46 <sup>F</sup> A)

''Strength Extinguished'' (CrAn 30/+46 FA)

''Strength Renewed'' (CrAn 35/+46 FA)

''The Wizard's Mount'' (CrAn 35/+33A)

''Beast of Outlandish Size'' (MuAn 15/+35 A)

''Growth of Creeping Things'' (MuAn 15/+35 A) ''Touch of the Wild'' (MuAn 20/+35A)

''The Beast Remade'' (MuAn(Co) 25/+32 A)

''Transformation of the Ravenous Beast to the Torpid''

''Toad'' (MuAn 25/+35 A)

''Icarus' Folly'' (MuAn 40/+48 FA)

''Decay Fur and Hide'' (PeAn 10/+27 A)

''Blunt the Viper's Fangs'' (PeAn 15/+27 A)

''Soothe the Ferocious Boar'' (ReAn 10/+31 A)

''Bind Wound'' (CrCo 10/+28)

''A Limb Bereft'' (Cr(Re)Co 30/+32F )

''Bushy Tail of the Branch-Dancer'' (MuCo(An)

5/+32)

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+45 <sup>F</sup> )

''Slime of the Muck-Dweller'' (MuCo(An) 5/+32) ''Sure-Footedness of the Crag-Leaper'' (MuCo(An) 5/+32)

''Webbed Toes of the Pond-Dweller'' (MuCo(An) 5/+32)

''Eyes from the Wizard Torn'' (Mu(In,Re)Co(Im) 15/+21F )

''Arm of the Infant'' (MuCo 20/+45 <sup>F</sup> )

''Spirit of the Bull of Minos'' (MuCo(An) 20/+45 ), Ritual

''Gift of the Minotaur'' (MuCo(An) 30/+45 FA)

''The Griffin Reborn'' (MuAn 35/+48 FA)

''Stillness of the Dead'' (ReCo(An) 25/+24)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5 /+15)

''Kiss of the Enigma'' (CrVi 15/+23) invented 3

times during research. F includes Magical Focus

A includes attunement of talisman

'''Appearance:''' Marcus is massive; eight foot tall and broad with it. He dresses in simple clothing and invariably hunches his shoulders in a futile attempt to hide his size. He has an olive complexion and black hair, and wears a beard (but no mustache) trimmed close to his jaw line. The stigmata of the Path of Seeming have manifested as an interlocking labyrinth pattern centered around his forehead. When he performs magic, the stigma shifts and rotates as if charting his path through the maze. His potent longevity ritual has prolonged his looks, and he appears to be only in his early forties despite being nearly seven decades old. He carries a bull-headed walking stick (as large as a staff to most people) that is his talisman.

'''Activities in the last 15 years''': During the last 15 years, Marcus has enchanted a second effect into the Mark of Protection (taking one season), and a third effect into the Labyrinth of the Open Mind (taking two seasons). He has prepared his talisman for enchantment, attuned it to himself, and invested three effects, taking a total of seven seasons. He also spent one season stabilizing the breakthrough he made. Due to his advanced abilities, the seasonal method has been used henceforth to determine his spells; in the last 15 years he has acquired 230 levels in 13 seasons, and has now acquired a total of 41 breakthrough points; he is on the verge of completing his research. He has gained 120 experience points in Abilities and 140 in Arts.

<span id="original-research"></span>
= ''Original Research'' =

''Many neckless faces sprouted, arms were wandering bereft of shoulders and eyes roamed alone in search of foreheads.''

– Empedocles, fragment 57

Marcus' obsession is with the Counter-Cyclical Alam (see ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'', page 47), a world which is the mirror of ours across the Wheel of Time, but progressing toward perfect harmony while our world descends into strife. As the counter-cyclical world progresses from chaos to order, simple life first appeared in the form of organs made from the primordial swirl of chaos. As the force of harmony increased in that universe, these organs combined together to form living creatures, and then these creatures combined to form the chimeric forms of legend: bull-headed men, women with lions' bodies, the chimera itself — an amalgam of lion, goat, and snake. Eventually, all life will be combined together in ultimate harmony. Marcus believes that the fantastic creatures of antiquity were creatures of greater harmony than those today, and seeks to recreate them in this world. However, Hermetic magic does not allow the creation of new creatures by combining the bodies of others, so Marcus is seeking a means to do so through a Breakthrough in magical theory (''Houses of Hermes: True Lineages'', pages 26–30).

Marcus has accumulated 41 breakthrough points through Original Research and Insight towards this Major Breakthrough, which would manifest as a Hermetic Virtue called Hermetic Metamorphosis (see insert for the likely result of this Original Research). The spells here represent his attempts to pursue this path. He also invented ''The Wizard's Mount'', ''Prying Eyes'', and ''The Beast Remade'' (from '''Ars Magica Fifth Edition'''), which yielded him 5 breakthrough points, from the latter.

<span id="animal-spells-6"></span>
=== ''Animal Spells'' ===

'''Worm of the Soil'''

CrAn 20

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Creates a beetle. All invertebrates are

referred to as &quot;worms&quot; in Mythic Europe. This spell provided no breakthrough to Marcus's research.

(base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="flight-perfected"></span>
==== '''Flight Perfected''' ====

CrAn 25

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Creates a dove in the hands of the caster. The bird acts like a normal bird for the duration of the spell. This spell provided Marcus with no breakthrough.

(base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="flight-divorced"></span>
==== '''Flight Divorced''' ====

CrAn 30

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

Creates a pair of bird wings, joined at their base. The wings flap frantically in ran-

<span id="magi-of-hermes-42"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

dom flight for the duration of the spell, since they lack sense organs or a mind to guide them. If released in an enclosed space, the erratic flight of the wings provides sufficient distraction to impose a –3 penalty on all rolls requiring mental effort or concentration, and adds an extra botch die to all activities. The guideline used in this spell creates a living bird rather than an animal's corpse, and the Part Target produces just the wings.

This spell provided Marcus with a breakthrough in the first of the two seasons it took him to invent it.

(base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

<span id="strength-extinguished"></span>
==== '''Strength Extinguished''' ====

CrAn 30

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

Creates a bull's heart. This spell provided Marcus with no breakthrough.

(base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

<span id="strength-renewed"></span>
=== '''Strength Renewed''' ===

CrAn 35

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

Creates a bull's heart that continues to beat strongly for the duration of the spell. In the three seasons it took Marcus to learn this spell, he was lucky enough to get a breakthrough. However, the spell also has a minor flaw thanks to experimentation; the heart only beats in the light, and the strength of the pulse is dependant on the amount of light — in shadow the beat is thready and shallow, while in bright sunshine it is like a drum.

(base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

<span id="touch-of-the-wild"></span>
==== '''Touch of the Wild''' ====

MuAn 20

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

The target animal reverts to a feral form and throws off all its training and domesti-

<span id="new-virtue-hermetic-metamorphosis"></span>
=== ''New Virtue: Hermetic Metamorphosis'' ===

''Minor, Supernatural &amp; Hermetic''

You are able to graft organs onto an animal's body to make a new creature. The donor organs can be from another animal or created magically using a Creo Animal ritual spell of Momentary Duration. The recipient must be an animal — a further breakthrough is needed to extend this Virtue to allow a human to be the recipient of an animal organ. The process of metamorphosis requires the casting of a special ritual spell that can only be invented by those who possess this Virtue. It's not known if such creatures breed true, but most likely not.

Note that this Virtue does not yet exist, but once Marcus has completed his work it will be integrated into Hermetic theory through Original Research, and may be taught to other magi either through personal instruction or by writing a tractatus describing the breakthrough. The source must grant at least 5 experience points in a single season for the Virtue to be conferred.

<span id="harmonic-metamorphosis-of-the-beast"></span>
= '''Harmonic Metamorphosis of the Beast''' =

Cr(Mu)An 35 R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual This spell can only be successfully cast by those with the Hermetic Metamorphosis Virtue. It requires the immobilized body of the recipient animal, and the donor organ. If the donor derives from another animal, it too must be immobilized. During the casting of the spell, the caster removes the organ from the donor and grafts it to the recipient. The spell resizes the organ (if necessary) and joins up the blood supply and internal organs. The type of organs that can be transplanted are functional units of the animal — its head, pair of hind legs, tail, pair of hands, heart, and so forth.

A replacement organ involves the removal of the recipient's organ and putting the donor organ in its place. If the caster wishes he may take the recipient's original organ and put it in the space left on the donor, but this requires two surgical rolls (see below), one for each animal.

A transposed organ involves the recipient gaining an organ without removing something first; for example, giving it a pair of wings or a second head. The donor animal (if any) dies as a result of this type of surgery.

Magical surgery of this type can be purely anatomical, or else confer a Virtue from the donor to the recipient. An anatomical change can grant the recipient a new ability (such as flight) or a Quality (see ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'', pages 40–43). A Virtue can be any General Virtue that derives from the body of the animal; such as Keen Vision, Long-Winded, or Tough. A donor who loses a Virtue due to this spell receives the Enfeebled Flaw if it survives the surgery.

The ritual surgery performed as part of the magical actions of casting this spell needs to be performed accurately to ensure the success of the spell. This requires a Dexterity + Chirurgy roll against an Ease Factor of 9. If the organ is transposed rather than replaced, the Ease Factor has a +3 modifier. If the surgery grants a Virtue rather than an anatomical change, the Ease Factor has an additional +3 modifier. If the surgery roll fails then the animal dies soon after the casting of the spell. If the surgery roll botches, then the spell creates some dreadful monster instead.

''Example: Marcus wishes to swap the head of a lion and an eagle in his first step to creating a griffin. Eagles have the Keen Vision Virtue, so this is more than simple anatomical surgery. To successfully implant the eagle's head on the lion's body, his surgery roll has an Ease Factor of 12. He needs only a 9 to successfully implant the lion's head on the eagle's body, but the lion-headed eagle that results suffers from the Enfeebled Flaw. The spell compensates for the vast difference in size between the two heads.''

(base 25, +1 Touch, +1 Muto requisite)

cation, if any. In general the animal grows larger (although does not usually gain a point of Size), its hair grows longer and any horns, teeth and claws available as weapons become more vicious. The animal often loses its domestic coloration, becoming plain brown or brindled grey. Note that in Mythic Europe dogs are not domesticated wolves, and cows were not bred from the primeval aurochs — animals were created in the state in which they are found. Yet all are familiar with the process of a beast becoming feral if abandoned by man, and that is what this spell does. Marcus did not gain any breakthrough from this spell.

(base 4, +1 Touch, +3 Moon)

<span id="the-griffin-reborn"></span>
=== '''The Griffin Reborn''' ===

MuAn 35

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Pair, Ritual

During the casting of this ritual spell, the caster removes the heads of two animals and reattaches them on each other's bodies. The surgery causes no damage as long as the spell is cast correctly. With a Corpus casting requisite one of the targets can be a human, but at least one must be an animal. At the end of the duration, the caster can restore the heads to their owners if both are present, but if either target is absent then both die.

Like ''Spirit of the Bull of Minos'', this spell is the result of an insight into the ancient magics of the Minoan priests. The atypical Target of Pair is part of the non-Hermetic specification of this spell, and is treated as Target Group for the purposes of spell calculation. A Hermetic variant would use Target Part, but only affect a single creature.

(base 5, +1 Touch, +3 Moon, +2 Pair)

<span id="icarus-folly"></span>
==== '''Icarus' Folly''' ====

MuAn 40

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The targeted animal is given a pair of wings. It does not immediately know how to fly, but just like a fledging bird it succeeds after the first few attempts. Unfortunately, a flaw introduced in the experimental process makes the duration of this spell unreliable; at the end of every hour of the duration, roll a simple die. If the result is equal or lower than the number of hours that have passed, the spell's duration ends prematurely. After the precipitous death of the first few test subjects, Marcus named the spell after the legendary inventor of wings who himself plummeted to death after flying too close to the sun. As if in compensation for the flawed spell, the second season of invention resulted in a breakthrough.

(base 25, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="disembodied-leg-size-3-combat-kick-init-1-attack-0-defense-1-damage-3-soak-0-wound-penalties-1-12-3-34-5-56-incapacitated-78-dead-9"></span>
=== ''Disembodied Leg'' '''Size''' –3 '''Combat''': ''Kick:'' Init –1, Attack +0, Defense –1, Damage +3 '''Soak''' +0 '''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–2), –3 (3–4), –5 (5–6), Incapacitated (7–8), Dead (9+) ===

<span id="corpus-spells-4"></span>
=== ''Corpus Spells'' ===

<span id="a-limb-bereft"></span>
==== '''A Limb Bereft''' ====

Cr(Re)Co 30

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

Creates a human leg that is animated and able to move by hopping. Through a quirk in the experimentation process, the leg has an inclination to kick anything it comes near; while there is little danger of serious damage, it is a grisly distraction. If its chosen target decides not to attack the limb directly, he takes a –3 penalty to all rolls and 2 extra botch dice.

Marcus was intrigued to discover that human limbs cannot be created as animate (unlike animal organs) and required a Rego requisite to provide motion. This spell did not provide him with any breakthrough, however.

(base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part, +1 Rego requisite)

<span id="eyes-from-the-wizard-torn"></span>
==== '''Eyes from the Wizard Torn''' ====

Mu(In, Re)Co(Im) 15 R: Per, D: Conc, T: Part

This macabre variation on ''Image from the Wizard Torn'' and ''Prying Eyes'' actually removes the caster's eyes and has them fly to the location of interest where they transmit the information that they see. At the end of the spell, the caster's eyes are restored to their proper place. This spell did not result in a breakthrough, although Marcus has found it useful. The Rego requisite is required to allow the eyes to fly, but does not incur additional magnitudes.

(base 3, +1 Conc, +1 Part, +1 Intellego requisite, +1 Imaginem requisite)

MuCo(An) 20

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Ind, Ritual

During the casting of this ritual spell, the target's heart is cut out and replaced with the heart of a bull. The surgery causes no damage as long as the spell is cast correctly, and it grants the target the Reserves of Strength Virtue throughout the duration of the spell. At the end of the year, the caster can replace the original heart of the target with no ill effects if it has been preserved sufficiently well. If this is not done, the target dies.

This spell results from an Insight (see ''Ancient Magic'', pages 8–9) Marcus received after investigating the catacombs under the ruined palace of Knossos. There he found ritual objects belonging to the Minoan Cult of the Bull who practiced a magic similar to that he was trying to achieve. His ability to read the memories of a sacrificial knife (thanks to the third station of the Path of Seeming, see ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'', pages 64–65) gave him the requisite insight to allow him to invent this non-standard spell. He has created an enchanted item called a Canopic Jar to preserve the heart of his experimental subjects (see Enchantments, below).

(base 2, +1 Touch, +4 Year; level 20 due to ritual effect)

<span id="vim-spells-1"></span>
=== ''Vim Spells'' ===

<span id="kiss-of-the-enigma"></span>
==== '''Kiss of the Enigma''' ====

CrVi 15

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

The target acquires two Warping Points, and, if a Hermetic magus, must check to see whether he enters Twilight in the normal way. Marcus invented this spell primarily to use on caged animals, to see if he could induce monstrous characteristics by infusing their bodies with pure magical energies, but the results were disappointingly random. He had to invent this spell three times before it yielded a breakthrough. The two prior versions both had Side Effects due to experimentation: the first spell changed the color of the target's hair, while the other made the target's skin transparent.

(base 10, +1 Touch)

<span id="new-spells-7"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Marcus has also created some spells that do not constitute part of his research.

<span id="corpus-spells-5"></span>
=== ''Corpus Spells'' ===

<span id="bushy-tail-of-the-branch-dancer"></span>
= '''Bushy Tail of the Branch-Dancer''' =

MuCo(An) 5

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target gains the long tail of a squirrel, giving him a +3 to all rolls to keep his balance. (base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, requisite free)

<span id="slime-of-the-muck-dweller"></span>
==== '''Slime of the Muck-Dweller''' ====

MuCo(An) 5

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target gains the slippery, slimy skin of an eel, which gives him a +6 bonus to his Defense Total against grappling attacks

(base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, requisite free)

<span id="sure-footedness-of-the-crag-leaper"></span>
= '''Sure-Footedness of the Crag-Leaper''' =

MuCo(An) 5

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target gains the hooves of a mountain goat, giving him a +3 to all rolls to climb and descend steep cliffs and precipitous crags.

(base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, requisite free)

<span id="webbed-toes-of-the-pond-dweller"></span>
== '''Webbed Toes of the Pond-Dweller''' ==

MuCo(An) 5

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target gains the feet of a frog, giving him a +3 to rolls to swim in still or slowly moving water.

(base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, requisite free)

<span id="gift-of-the-minotaur"></span>
==== '''Gift of the Minotaur''' ====

MuCo(An) 30

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

The target of this spell gains the head of

<span id="magi-of-hermes-43"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

a bull. The target's capacity to speak is not affected by the spell, but his voice is. The target may use his horns as a weapon, using the Brawl Ability and the following weapon statistics: Init +2, Attack +3, Defense +2, Damage +3

(base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

<span id="stillness-of-the-dead"></span>
=== '''Stillness of the Dead''' ===

ReCo(An) 25

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target is rendered completely immobile for the duration of the spell. This spell will work on both humans and animals, and Marcus developed it for use on targets affected by his various bizarre ritual spells that remove or exchange body parts.

(base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Animal requisite)

<span id="enchanted-items-7"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Marcus has designed the following enchanted items.

<span id="the-labyrinth-of-the-open-mind"></span>
=== ''The Labyrinth of the Open Mind'' ===

Marcus has enchanted the floor to his laboratory to assist in his magical investigations. It is made from two types of wood, one pale and the other stained dark. The complex pattern produced at Marcus' exacting instructions forms a labyrinth, and Marcus' sanctum has been arranged so that items of furniture and pieces of laboratory equipment are located in mystically significant locations. Each &quot;path&quot; of the interlaced design is enchanted with a different effect, all of which are designed to provide magical enhancements to his laboratory activities (see ''Covenants'', page 121 for details of Magic Items for Laboratories).

The floor was prepared with 10 pawns of Vim vis (a huge item made of wood). It has been enchanted with three effects that occupy 9 pawns' worth of space.

<span id="path-to-serendipitous-discovery"></span>
= '''Path to Serendipitous Discovery''' =

CrVi 24

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Room Pen 0, constant effect

Everything in Marcus' sanctum is tainted slightly with magic. This gives him a +2 laboratory specialization in Experimentation, but unfortunately has the unintended side effect of increasing its Warping Score by 1.

(base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Room; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger)

<span id="path-to-enlightened-operations"></span>
= '''Path to Enlightened Operations''' =

ReAn 20

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Room Pen 0, unlimited uses per day

Items made of animal products — like most of Marcus' custom-built laboratory equipment — are supported in the air wherever they are released, and maintained there until plucked free. If left floating, Marcus' tools slowly move, aligning themselves into propitious arrangements that actually enhance the activity in question. This enchantment gives Marcus's laboratory a +1 General Quality.

(base 1, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Room; +10 unlimited/day, +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="path-of-shadows-beneath-the-skin"></span>
= '''Path of Shadows Beneath the Skin''' =

InCo(An) 40

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Vision

Pen 0, 1/day

This effect grants the target the ability to see the internal organs of humans or animals as a magical sense. This greatly enhances laboratory operations employing Corpus or Animal (or, indeed, both), granting a +2 laboratory specialization in both Arts.

(base 5, +1 Conc, +4 Vision, +1 Animal requisite; +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="canopic-jar"></span>
=== ''Canopic Jar'' ===

This jar takes the form of a rotund human figure about 18 inches tall made of alabaster. The lid of the jar is carved into the shape of the figure's head; of Marcus' four copies, one has the head of a hawk, one a lion, one

a baboon, and one a human. The Canopic Jars are figured and named after the jars used in ancient Egypt to preserve the organs of mummified kings. These were made as Lesser Enchantments, and Marcus was able to make two in a single season.

<span id="halt-corruptions-work"></span>
=== '''Halt Corruption's Work''' ===

CrCo 9 R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind Pen 0, constant effect

Any bodily organ placed inside is protected from putrefaction while it remains within the jar.

(base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger)

<span id="the-mark-of-protection"></span>
=== ''The Mark of Protection'' ===

Marcus has a tattoo depicting the sun in its glory that covers his entire abdomen. He has enchanted this tattoo as an invested item, preparing it for enchantment with 6 pawns of vis (tattoos have a base material cost of 2 — see ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'', page 51 — and its size gives it a multiplier of 3). The purple ink that was used to inscribe the tattoo was extracted from the murex shell, and the crushed shells were also included, granting a Shape and Material bonus of +2 to protective effects. The tattoo holds two effects, occupying all 6 pawns' worth of space.

<span id="resilience-of-theseus"></span>
==== '''Resilience of Theseus''' ====

MuCo 39 R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind Pen 0, constant effect

Marcus has a +4 to all Soak rolls. However, due to the experimentation used to create the effect it has a minor flaw — the tattoo must be exposed to grant the bonus, rather than being covered by clothing.

(base 20, +1 Touch, +2 Sun; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger)

<span id="ariadnes-thread"></span>
==== '''Ariadne's Thread''' ====

InCo 20 R: Arc, D: Mom, T: Ind Pen 0, 1/day

<span id="magi-of-hermes-44"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

The target always knows exactly where he is in relation to one or more Arcane Connections he has in distant locations. The more Arcane Connections to himself he has, the more accurate his estimation of position; he can feel the tug of each one as he turns in a full circle, and the relative strength tells him the distance. Consequently, the caster is never lost. Marcus invented this effect after one of his ordeals on the Path of Seeming left him hundreds of miles from home in a land where no-one spoke his language.

(base 3, +4 Arc, +1 complexity)

<span id="talisman-bucephalos"></span>
= ''Talisman: Bucephalos'' =

Marcus began to develop his talisman comparatively late in his career, since he has been obsessively pursuing his original research. It shares its name (meaning &quot;oxfaced&quot;) with Alexander the Great's favorite horse. It is a wooden staff four feet long, which for the giant-sized Marcus is proportioned like a walking stick rather than a weapon. The shaft is made of linden wood and is wide — three inches in diameter. The staff's head is a glossy chunk of magnetite carved into the shape of a bull's head. The eyes of the bull are topaz. It was prepared for enchantment with 12 pawns of Vim vis (the highest single-cost part of the item is the tiny semi-precious stones), and has been attuned as a talisman. It currently has 3 effects occupying 9 pawns' worth of space.

<span id="attunements-2"></span>
==== '''Attunements''' ====

* +3 Animal (magnetite)
* +2 protection against weapons (linden)
* +4 control things at a distance (staff)

<span id="mastering-the-unruly-beast"></span>
==== '''Mastering the Unruly Beast''' ====

ReAn 33 R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind Pen 16, 1/day

As the spell of the same name. The effect is triggered by pointing the bull-head at the creature and slowly lowering it.

(base 15, +1 Touch, +1 Sun; +8 Penetration)

<span id="punishment-of-midas"></span>
=== '''Punishment of Midas''' ===

MuCo(An) 40 R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group Pen 0, 1/day

One limb of each target turns into that of a random animal. Roll two simple dice: one for the limb, and one for the animal.

'''Limb:''' 1 to 2 – Head; 3 to 6 – Arm (odd: left, even: right); 7 to 10 – Leg (odd: left, even: right)

'''Animal:''' 1 – goat; 2 – pig; 3 – hare; 4 – chicken; 4 – donkey; 5 – dog; 6 – lizard; 7 – toad; 8 – cow; 9 – rat; 10 – beetle.

All limbs are re-scaled in size to match that of the replaced limb. Anything held in a transformed hand is dropped, and a transformed leg becomes inappropriate to the current footwear and may trip up the wearer. If the head is transformed, the target cannot speak but retains his intelligence. Up to 10 people can be simultaneously affected; if there are fewer than 10 individuals, then some targets may experience a change in more than one limb. The effect is triggered by pointing the bull-head at a group and making a circling gesture while speaking the command word. Marcus had only intended to cause changes in land animals, but his experimentation caused the anomalous result of a chicken.

(base 10, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group)

<span id="return-to-the-earth"></span>
==== '''Return to the Earth''' ====

MuTe 20 R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind Pen 10, 24/day

A metal or stone object targeted by this effect is momentarily transformed into sand. This is sufficient to destroy most handheld weapons, as they become metal grains around the feet of the wielder. But if the object remains undisturbed, it is unaffected when it becomes metal again moments later. The effect can target any single object that can be carried in one hand, such as a sword. The effect is triggered by pointing the butt of the staff at the target in a short jabbing motion while speaking the command word.

(base 2, +2 Voice, +2 affect metal; +5 Penetration, +5 24/day)

<span id="chapter-ten"></span>
=== ''Chapter Ten'' ===

<span id="persephone-of-tytalus"></span>
= ''Persephone of Tytalus'' =

'''Concept:''' Driven by vengeance against her pater, she and her disfigured sister use magic to enhance their network of agents, giving them a great deal of mundane influence.

Marie-Philipe and Marie-Helene were sisters from a village near a covenant. When a magus of House Tytalus chose the younger — Marie-Helene — to become his apprentice, she begged for her sister to join them as well but the magus refused; he had no interest in wasting his time on a non-Gifted girl, even if she did exhibit some latent magical ability. A short while later a catastrophic fire ravaged the family home. Marie-Philipe survived although she was horribly scarred. Marie-Helene was convinced that her master was responsible for the fire, intending to rid his apprentice of a distraction to her magical development. Marie-Helene hid her sister away and cared for her, escaping at night to bring her food and share her lessons in Hermetic magic. Unfortunately, without either The Gift or having been opened to the Arts, Marie-Philipe was unable to replicate the simplest spells.

When Marie-Helene passed her Gauntlet, she took the name &quot;Persephone of Tytalus,&quot; and her sister adopted the moniker &quot;Kore.&quot; The pair swore to get vengeance on Persephone's master, and that he would have a spectacular, fiery end. This has nothing to do with the House tradition of beloved rivals; this is revenge, pure and simple. Persephone is rarely found without Kore nearby, although the elder sister tends to keep to the shadows to hide her scarred face.

Persephone maintains a network of agents (see sidebar) although most are not aware that they work for her; she contacts them either through an intermediary or in disguise. Her agents are principally spies, gathering information that Kore sorts through for useful intelligence about their targets. Many of her spells and enchantments revolve around ways in which she can use her agents more efficiently in her plans, which have tended to drift from revenge to general meddling in the politics of her tribunal.

<span id="persephone-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Persephone at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per –1, Pre +3, Com +2, Str –1, Sta +1, Dex –1, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 21 (21) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0 '''Confidence Score:''' 2 (6)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Secondary Insight; Affinity with Muto, Improved Characteristics, Puissant Mentem, Quiet Magic, Self Confident*, Social Contacts, Special Circumstances (when sister is near), Subtle Magic; Deficient Technique (Creo), Driven (defeat master), True Love (sister); Fear (fire)

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Devoted to Sister +3, Vengeful +3, Flirt +1

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init 0, Attack n/a, Defense 0, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5,

Unconscious

Persphone's network of agents is in a stage of flux; she rarely maintains an agent for long out of a sense of paranoia that he may be a double agent. However, a typical agency at any given time may contain some of the following individuals. The listed Personality Trait is the bond through which the agent is manipulated. For more information, see ''Houses of Hermes: Societates'', pages 140–144.

<span id="macco"></span>
=== '''Macco''' ===

Clerk, Fear of Discovery +1, Resources: As a novice scribe in a rival covenant, he has access to the correspondence of the magi, and is aware of major events.

<span id="sir-stephène"></span>
==== '''Sir Stephène''' ====

Knight, Hopeful of a Cure +3, Resources: He has substantial wealth, but is secretly a Lycanthrope and has been promised a cure.

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (logic), Charm 1 (elders), Concentration 1 (jostled), Finesse 1 (Imaginem), French 5 (Norman), Guile 2 (disguise), Latin 4 (arguing), Magic Theory 4 (enchanting jewelry), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (House Tytalus), Parma Magica 1 (Corpus), Penetration 1 (Mentem), Philosophiae 1 (Tytalan philosophy)

'''Arts: Cr''' 0**, In** 6**, Mu** 8**, Pe** 2**, Re** 4**; An** 2**, Aq** 1**, Au** 2**, Co** 3**, He** 2**, Ig** 2**, Im** 4**, Me** 7+3**, Te** 5**, Vi** 3

'''Twilight Scars:''' none '''Equipment:''' none '''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0) '''Spells Known:'''

''Disguise of the New Visage'' (MuCo 15/+12)

''Dance of the Staves'' (ReHe 5/+7)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+11) ''Recollection of Memories Never Quite Lived'' (MuMe

4/+19) ''Sight of the Transparent Motive'' (InMe 10/+17) ''Tip of the Tongue'' (PeMe 5/+13)

''Trust of Childlike Faith'' (PeMe 10/+13)

''The Call to Slumber'' (ReMe 10/+15)

''Confusion of the Numbed Will'' (ReMe 15/+15)

''Object of Increased Size'' (MuTe 15/+14)

<span id="pierre"></span>
==== '''Pierre''' ====

Journeyman, Ambitious +1, Resources: A member of a distant shoemakers' guild, he has a mentor in his guildmaster.

<span id="jack"></span>
=== '''Jack''' ===

Wanderer, Avaricious +1, Resources: A peddler of penny cures and snake oil, he is well traveled and apprised of local gossip.

<span id="claude"></span>
==== '''Claude''' ====

Warrior, Loyal to Sisters +3, Resources: The cousin of the two sisters, now a trusted man-at-arms to a nobleman. He can lend the strength of his men if asked.

<span id="sister-maurisse"></span>
==== '''Sister Maurisse''' ====

Mendicant Friar, Pity +2, Resources: A nun who believes the two sisters to be in need of protection.

''Wielding the Invisible Sling'' (ReTe 10/+10) ''Shroud Magic'' (MuVi 15/+12)

'''Appearance:''' A pretty young girl with a beguiling smile. She has long russet hair, which she keeps unbound and uncovered in the manner of unmarried women. She prefers to dress in simple clothes: a woolen dress and kirtle with a leather bodice.

'''Casting Sigil: D'''oubling. Targets sometimes have a ghostly after-effect, shadow, or echo.

'''Voting Sigil:''' A silver bracelet bearing an onyx.

<span id="persephone-15-years"></span>
=== ''Persephone +15 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per –1, Pre +3, Com +2, Str –1, Sta +1, Dex –1, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 36 (36) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 2 (13) '''Confidence Score:''' 2 (6)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Secondary Insight; Affinity with Muto, Improved Characteristics, Puissant Mentem, Quiet Magic, Self Confident*, Social Contacts, Special Circumstances (when sister is near), Subtle Magic; Deficient Technique (Creo), Driven (best master), True Love (sister); Fear (fire)

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Devoted to Sister +3, Vengeful +3, Flirt +1

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init 0, Attack n/a, Defense 0, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (logic), Charm 2 (elders), Concentration 1 (jostled), Finesse 2 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 1 (nobles), French 5 (Norman), Guile 2 (disguise), Intrigue 2 (Hermetic), Latin 4 (arguing), Magic Theory 5 (10) (enchanting jewelry), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (House Tytalus), Parma Magica 2 (4) (Corpus), Penetration 3 (Mentem), Philosophiae 3 (Tytalan philosophy), Stealth 1 (towns), Teaching 1 (Arts)

'''Arts: Cr''' 4**, In** 8**, Mu** 12**, Pe** 7**, Re** 8**; An** 6**, Aq** 3**, Au** 5 (3)''', Co''' 5**, He** 5**, Ig** 4**, Im** 7**, Me** 10+3**, Te** 8**, Vi** 7

'''Twilight Scars:''' Her eyes shine faintly green in the dark.

'''Equipment:''' Coins of Mirth (0 – 13, depending on how many she has distributed), Bracelet of Clandestine Insignificance.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Disguise of the New Visage'' (MuCo 15/+18)

''Dance of the Staves'' (ReHe 5/+14)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+16)

''Voice of the Leucrota'' (MuIm 4/+20)

''Aura of Childlike Innocence'' (MuIm 10/+20)

''Sight of the Transparent Motive'' (InMe 10/+22)

''Recollection of Memories Never Quite Lived'' (MuMe 4/+26)

''My Old and Dear Friend'' (MuMe 20/+26): Mastery 1 (Quiet)

''I Was Never Here'' (PeMe 5/+21)

''Tip of the Tongue'' (PeMe 5/+21)

''Trust of Childlike Faith'' (PeMe 10/+21)

''The Call to Slumber'' (ReMe 10/+22)

''Confusion of the Numbed Will'' (ReMe 15/+23):

Mastery 1 (Fast Cast)

''Object of Increased Size'' (MuTe 15/+21)

''Wielding the Invisible Sling'' (ReTe 10/+17)

''Shroud Magic'' (MuVi 15/+20)

''Opening the Intangible Tunnel'' (ReVi 20/+16)

'''Appearance:''' A beautiful mature woman with a beguiling smile. She has long russet hair, which she keeps unbound and

uncovered in the manner of unmarried women. She prefers to dress in simple clothes: a woolen dress and kirtle with a leather bodice.

'''Activities in last 15 years''': Persephone's first enchantment was the Coins of Mirth, Charged Items of which she initially made six. She made a second batch using the Lab Text and gained another seven. She spent another season in the lab creating the Bracelet of Clandestine Insignificance. Finally, Persephone started work on the Signet of Hallam, preparing the item for enchantment and instilling the first effect (in exchange for this item, her covenant has made both Persephone and Kore a longevity ritual). In the last 15 years Persephone, has also gained 159 experience points on Abilities, learned or invented 59 levels of spells, and earned 192 experience points in Arts. Due to her Secondary Insight Virtue, it was assumed that the average source quality for studying the Arts was 8. Consequently, she gained an extra 40 experience points in Forms and an extra 26 experience points in Techniques.

<span id="persephone-30-years"></span>
=== ''Persephone +30 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per –1, Pre +3 (1), Com +2, Str –1 (1), Sta +1, Dex –1 (1),

Qik –1 '''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 51 (40)

'''Decrepitude:''' 0 (4) '''Warping Score:''' 3 (45)

'''Confidence Score:''' 2 (6 points)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Secondary Insight; Affinity with Muto, Improved Characteristics, Puissant Mentem, Quiet Magic, Self Confident*, Social Contacts, Special Circumstances (when sister is near), Subtle Magic; Deficient Technique (Creo), Driven (best master), True Love (sister); Fear (fire)

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Devoted to Sister +3, Vengeful +3, Flirt +1

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init 0, Attack n/a, Defense 0, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-45"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 3 (logic), Charm 2 (elders), Concentration 1 (jostled), Finesse 2 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 1 (nobles), French 5 (Norman), Guile 3 (disguise), Intrigue 2 (Hermetic), Latin 4 (arguing), Magic Theory 6 (enchanting jewelry), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (House Tytalus), Parma Magica 3 (Corpus), Penetration 3 (Mentem), Philosophiae 3 (Tytalan philosophy), Stealth 1 (towns), Teaching 2 (Arts)

'''Arts: Cr''' 5**, In** 10**, Mu** 14 (5)''', Pe''' 10**, Re** 10**; An** 7**, Aq** 5**, Au** 8**, Co** 6**, He** 6**, Ig** 5**, Im** 9 (5)''', Me''' 12+3**, Te** 10**, Vi** 8

'''Twilight Scars:''' Her eyes shine faintly green in the dark, clothes become of darker hue as the day progresses and lighten again during the night, all ale within 3 paces becomes water.

'''Equipment:''' Coins of Mirth (0 – 13, depending on how many she has distributed), Bracelet of Clandestine Insignificance, Pigeon Amulets (0 – 2, depending on how many she has distributed).

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Remake the Tailor's Craft'' (MuAn 15/+22) ''Disguise of the New Visage'' (MuCo 15/+21)

''Dance of the Staves'' (ReHe 5/+17)

''Trigger the Distant Power'' (CrIm 5/+7*)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+20)

''Summoning the Distant Image'' (InIm 25/+20)

''Voice of the Leucrota'' (MuIm 4/+24)

''Aura of Childlike Innocence'' (MuIm 10/+24)

''Sight of the Transparent Motive'' (InMe 10/+26)

''The Factor's Roll Call'' (InMe 20/+26)

''Funding the Blackmailer's Purse'' (InMe 30/+26)

''Recollection of Memories Never Quite Lived'' (MuMe 4/+30)

''My Old and Dear Friend'' (MuMe 20/+31): Mastery 1 (Quiet)

''I Was Never Here'' (PeMe 5/+26)

''Tip of the Tongue'' (PeMe 5/+26)

''The Call to Slumber'' (ReMe 10/+26)

''Trust of Childlike Faith'' (PeMe 10/+26)

''Confusion of the Numbed Will'' (ReMe 15/+27):

Mastery 1 (Fast Cast)

''Object of Increased Size'' (MuTe 15/+25)

''Wielding the Invisible Sling'' (ReTe 10/+21)

''Shroud Magic'' (MuVi 15/+23)

''Opening the Intangible Tunnel'' (ReVi 20/+19)

\* includes Deficient Creo

'''Appearance:''' A beautiful mature woman with a beguiling smile. She has long russet hair, which she keeps confined in a crespine (a hair net) attached to the back of her coif. She prefers to dress in simple clothes: a woolen dress and kirtle with a leather bodice.

'''Activities in last 15 years''': Persephone has

spent three seasons instilling three more effects into the Signet of Hallam. She has created two copies of the Charged Item she calls Pigeon Amulets. She has begun to train an apprentice, and has spent four seasons so far on her education. In the last 15 years, Persephone has also gained 71 experience points in Abilities, learned or invented 95 levels of spells, and earned 224 experience points in Arts. Due to her Secondary Insight Virtue it was assumed that the average source quality for studying the Arts was 8. Consequently, she gained an extra 32 experience points in Forms and an extra 26 experience points in Techniques.

<span id="persephone-45-years"></span>
=== ''Persephone +45 years'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per –1, Pre +3 (1), Com +2 (1), Str –1 (1), Sta +1, Dex –1 (1), Qik –1

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 66 (52)

'''Decrepitude:''' 1 (0)

'''Warping Score:''' 4 (70)

'''Confidence Score:''' 3 (9 points)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Secondary Insight; Affinity with Muto, Improved Characteristics, Puissant Mentem, Quiet Magic, Self Confident*, Social Contacts, Special Circumstances (when sister is near), Subtle Magic; Deficient Technique (Creo), Driven (best master), True Love (sister); Fear (fire)

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Devoted to Sister +3, Vengeful +3, Flirt +1

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dodge:'' Init 0, Attack n/a, Defense 0, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 3 (logic), Charm 2 (elders), Concentration 2 (jostled), Finesse 3 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 2 (nobles), French 5 (Norman), Guile 3 (disguise), Intrigue 2 (Hermetic), Latin 4 (arguing), Magic Theory 6 (enchanting jewelry), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (House Tytalus), Parma Magica 4 (Corpus), Penetration 4 (Mentem), Philosophiae 3 (Tytalan philosophy), Stealth 2 (towns), Teaching 2 (Arts)

'''Arts: Cr''' 5**, In** 10**, Mu** 16**, Pe** 11 (2)''', Re''' 12**; An** 8**, Aq** 6**, Au** 9**, Co** 9**, He** 7**, Ig** 5**, Im** 11**, Me** 13+3**, Te** 11**, Vi** 9

'''Twilight Scars:''' Her eyes shine faintly green

<span id="magi-of-hermes-46"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

in the dark, clothes become of darker hue as the day progresses and lighten again during the night, all ale within 3 paces becomes water, her hair ripples

casts a spell.

'''Equipment:''' Coins of Mirth (0 – 13, depending on how many she has distributed),

<span id="companion-kore"></span>
=== ''Companion: Kore'' ===

Kore harbors a hatred for her sister's pater that outmatches Persephone's. She is capable of much greater passion — whereas Persephone's resentment is academic and considered, Kore's is visceral. She feels that Persephone has become distracted with being a maga, so has taken the burden of the vendetta onto herself. Unknown to her sister, her pater is observed at all times by mundane agents, who are occasionally assisted with purloined magical devices. She has launched several clandestine attacks

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Appearance:''' A scant inch taller than her

''Kore''

knowledge of her sister's actions.

against him using her Hex Ability, and has even managed to secure one of his lesser enchantments, knowing it to be an Arcane Connection. Kore knows full well that her actions could land her sister in serious trouble with the Hermetic authorities, and has been exceptionally careful to cover her tracks. Persephone can answer truthfully in front of the Quaesitores that she had no

'''Characteristics:''' Int +3, Per 0, Pre +3, Com –3, Str +1, Sta +1, Dex –1, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 24 (24) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0

'''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3 points)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' Wise One; Entrancement, Hex (see ''Realms of Power: The Infernal'', page 85); Arcane Lore, Strong Willed, True Love (sister); Enemy, Hatred; Disfigured, Offensive to Animals, Palsied Hands, Reclusive

'''Personality Traits:''' Wrathful +3, Ruthless +3, Devoted to Sister +2, Secretive +1

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Knife:'' Init 0, Attack +4, Defense +4, Damage +3

'''Soak:''' +1

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (grammar), Brawl 3 (knife), Chirurgy 2 (on sister), Entrancement 4 (men), Folk Ken 2 (magi), French 5 (Norman), Guile 2 (to magi), Hex 4 (sudden fires), Infernal Lore 3 (curses), Latin 3 (Hermetic), Leadership 2 (agents), Magic Lore 3 (fire spirits), Magic Theory 3 (spells), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (local tribunal), Penetration 2 (Hex), Profession: Apothecary 3 (poisons), Stealth 1 (avoiding attention)

'''Equipment:''' none

sister and with the same luxurious russet hair, it would be easy to mistake Kore for her sister were it not for the hideous burn scar on the left side of her body. The puckered flesh distorts her face into a permanent sneer. Her hands constantly shake — another symptom of her wounds — and she usually steadies them by crossing them tightly across her chest. She habitually wears a hooded cloak of dark-colored wool so as to hide her face as best she can.

'''Kore +15 Years'''

'''Age:''' 39 (38)

'''Characteristics:''' Int +3, Per 0, Pre +3, Com –3, Str +1, Sta +1, Dex –1, Qik 0

'''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 1 (4)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': Add Compulsion

– hand washing (from Warping)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (grammar), Awareness 2 (people hiding), Brawl 4 (knife), Chirurgy 2 (on sister), Entrancement 5 (men), Folk Ken 2 (magi), French 5 (Norman), Guile 3 (to magi), Hex 5 (sudden fires), Infernal Lore 4 (curses), Intrigue 2 (magi), Latin 3 (10) (Hermetic), Leadership 3 (agents), Magic Lore 4 (fire spirits), Magic Theory 3 (spells), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (local tribunal), Penetration 3 (Hex), Profession: Apothecary 4 (poisons), Stealth 3 (avoiding attention)

'''Kore +30 Years'''

'''Age:''' 54 (51)

'''Characteristics:''' Int +3, Per 0, Pre +3

(2), Com –3, Str +1 (1), Sta +1, Dex –1

(1), Qik 0

'''Decrepitude:''' 0 (4) '''Warping Score:''' 2 (6)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': Add Compulsion

– hand washing (from Warping)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore 1 (around covenant), Artes Liberales 2 (grammar), Awareness 2 (people hiding), Brawl 4 (knife), Chirurgy 3 (on sister), Church Lore 1 (corrupt priests), Entrancement 5 (5) (men), Folk Ken 3 (magi), French 5 (Norman), Guile 4 (to magi), Hex 7 (sudden fires), Infernal Lore 4 (curses), Intrigue 3 (magi), Latin 4 (Hermetic), Leadership 4 (agents), Magic Lore 4 (fire spirits), Magic Theory 3 (spells), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (local tribunal), Penetration 4 (Hex), Profession: Apothecary 4 (poisons), Stealth 3 (avoiding attention)

'''Kore +45 Years'''

'''Age:''' 69 (62)

'''Characteristics:''' Int +3 (2), Per –1 (1), Pre +3 (2), Com –3, Str +1 (1), Sta +1, Dex –2, Qik 0

'''Decrepitude:''' 1 (4) '''Warping Score:''' 3 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': Add Compulsion – hand washing, Lesser Malediction — plants wither in her vicinity (from Warping)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore 2 (around covenant), Artes Liberales 3 (grammar), Awareness 2 (people hiding), Brawl 4 (knife), Chirurgy 3 (on sister), Church Lore 2 (corrupt priests), Entrancement 7 (men), Folk Ken 3 (magi), French 5 (Norman), Guile 4 (to magi), Hex 8 (sudden fires), Infernal Lore 5 (curses), Intrigue 4 (magi), Latin 4 (Hermetic), Leadership 4 (agents), Magic Lore 5 (fire spirits), Magic Theory 4 (spells), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (local tribunal), Penetration 4 (Hex), Profession: Apothecary 4 (poisons), Stealth 3 (avoiding attention)

Bracelet of Clandestine Insignificance, Pigeon Amulets (0 – 10, depending on how many she has distributed), Amor Sororis talisman

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Remake the Tailor's Craft'' (MuAn 15/+25)

''Disguise of the New Visage'' (MuCo 15/+30 T)

''Dance of the Staves'' (ReHe 5/+20)

''Trigger the Distant Power'' (CrIm 5/+9*)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+22)

''Summoning the Distant Image'' (InIm 25/+22)

''Voice of the Leucrota'' (MuIm 4/+28)

''Aura of Childlike Innocence'' (MuIm 10/+28)

''Catching the Eye'' (CrMe 15/+11*)

''Sight of the Transparent Motive'' (InMe 10/+27)

''The Factor's Roll Call'' (InMe 20/+27)

''Music of the Unwanted Attention'' (InMe 25/+27)

''Funding the Blackmailer's Purse'' (InMe 30/+27) ''Recollection of Memories Never Quite Lived'' (MuMe

4/+33) ''My Old and Dear Friend'' (MuMe 20/+34): Mastery 1 (Quiet)

''I Was Never Here'' (PeMe 5/+28)

''Tip of the Tongue'' (PeMe 5/+28)

''Trust of Childlike Faith'' (PeMe 10/+28)

''The Call to Slumber'' (ReMe 10/+29)

''Confusion of the Numbed Will'' (ReMe 15/+30):

Mastery 1 (Fast Cast)

''Object of Increased Size'' (MuTe 15/+28)

''Short Step of the Ghost'' (MuTe(Au) 25/+26)

''Wielding the Invisible Sling'' (ReTe 10/+24)

''Invisible Hand of the Thief'' (ReTe 20/+24)

''Opening the Intangible Tunnel'' (ReVi 20/+18)

''Shroud Magic'' (MuVi 15/+26)

\* includes Deficient Creo

T includes Talisman attunement bonus

'''Appearance:''' A beautiful older woman with a beguiling smile. She has long russet hair, which she keeps confined in a crespine (a hair net) attached to the back of her coif. She prefers to dress in simple clothes: a woolen dress and kirtle with a leather bodice.

'''Activities in last 15 years''': Persephone has spent 11 seasons completing her apprentice's training. She has instilled the last effect into the Signet of Hallam, and created eight more Pigeon Amulets using her laboratory text. Persephone has spent five seasons on her talisman: preparing it for enchantment, attuning it as a talisman, and instilling two effects in it. She has also spent three seasons preparing and enchanting a twinned item for her sister Kore. She has invented 85 levels of spells, but

<span id="magi-of-hermes-47"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

these are counted as four seasons in the laboratory due to her advanced Arts. She also spent a season inventing the ''Invisible Hand of the Thief spell'' from a laboratory text that she had to buy from a colleague. In the last 15 years, Persephone has also gained 85 experience points in Abilities and earned 165 experience points in Arts. Due to her Secondary Insight Virtue, it was assumed that the average source quality for studying the Arts was 8. Consequently, she gained an extra 24 experience points in Forms and an extra 22 experience points in Techniques.

<span id="new-spells-8"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Persephone has designed the following new spells.

<span id="animal-spells-7"></span>
=== ''Animal Spells'' ===

<span id="remake-the-tailors-craft"></span>
==== '''Remake the Tailor's Craft''' ====

MuAn 15

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group

Transforms a set of clothing into different clothes. The substance and color must be preserved, but the shape and number of the garments can be altered. Thus a peasant's woolen smock can become a woolen dress, wimple, and cloak. An Intelligence + Finesse roll determines the quality of the new set of clothes; an Ease Factor of 6 is sufficient for a simple change, although the Ease Factor is 3 points higher if the new clothes are dramatically different from the old. The spell assumes that the clothing is in the main of animal origin — wool, felt, fur, leather, and silk — which is usually the case. A casting requisite of Herbam is needed to transform garments that are partly of plant origin, but items made solely of plant matter cannot be affected. Accouterments like wooden or metal fastenings remain unchanged.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Group)

<span id="imaginem-spells-3"></span>
=== ''Imaginem Spells'' ===

<span id="trigger-the-distant-power"></span>
=== '''Trigger the Distant Power''' ===

CrIm 5

R: Arc, D: Mom, T: Ind

The caster specifies a particular noise that then momentarily sounds in the vicinity of an object, place, or person to which the caster has an Arcane Connection. The spell cannot duplicate a voice or say words.

Persephone uses this simple spell to trigger a number of different effects in the charged items she makes and distributes to her agents. Each item is keyed to trigger its effect upon hearing a commonplace noise, like a whine, a buzz, or a chirrup easily attributable to an insect.

(Base 1, +4 Arc)

<span id="voice-of-the-leucrota"></span>
==== '''Voice of the Leucrota''' ====

MuIm 4

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target's voice is changed so that it is wholly different. This can duplicate the voice of a specific person known to the caster, or a particular accent he has heard before, or simply change the voice to be different than the target's own. This spell does not allow the target to speak a language that she does not know. An Intelligence + Finesse roll against an Ease Factor of 6 can accurately replicate an accent, and a 9 is needed to duplicate a specific voice. Someone more familiar with the person mimicked may still perpetrate the falsehood. This is also Persephone's favored spell used to humiliate an opponent she has bested in certamen — she often gives them an unnaturally squeaky or ''basso profundo'' voice. A leucrota is a mythical beast that can mimic the voices of men to lure them as prey.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="aura-of-childlike-innocence"></span>
=== '''Aura of Childlike Innocence''' ===

MuIm 10

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

This spell is a variant of ''Aura of Ennobled Presence'', except that it causes the target to appear more guileless, gullible, and naïve. The character gets a +3 to rolls to deflect suspicion

<span id="new-guideline-rete-4"></span>
=== ''New Guideline: ReTe 4'' ===

Transport a target instantly up to five paces. Add one magnitude for 50 paces, two magnitudes for 500 paces, three magnitudes for one league, four magnitudes for seven leagues, and five magnitudes for a place to which you have an Arcane Connection.

or convince others of his innocence. To those affected by the caster's Gift, his apparent innocence and unblemished honor appears sanctimonious and self-righteous (originally in ''Houses of Hermes: Societates'', page 96).

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="mentem-spells-3"></span>
=== ''Mentem Spells'' ===

<span id="catching-the-eye"></span>
==== '''Catching the Eye''' ====

CrMe 15 R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Ind

The caster momentarily attracts the target's attention, sufficiently to make eye contact to follow up with a spell of Range: Eye. This spell is normally redundant given the spectacle of spell casting; however Persephone has both Quiet and Subtle Magic, and a spell at Range: Eye is far more subtle than one of Range: Voice.

(Base 4, +3 Sight)

<span id="the-factors-roll-call"></span>
==== '''The Factor's Roll Call''' ====

InMe 20

R: Eye, D: Mom, T: Ind

This spell probes the mind of the target to reveal if he has ever heard a specific word. Persephone uses this spell to determine whether a given person is one of her agents — since she operates her agents remotely she instructs her factors to say an obscure word to all recruited agents. This spell therefore tells her if a person is in her employ. She has on occasion used it to discover whether her identity has been leaked. The word she most commonly uses is &quot;shibboleth,&quot; although theologians may have heard this word before.

(Base 15, +1 Eye)

<span id="music-of-the-unwanted-attention"></span>
== '''Music of the Unwanted Attention''' ==

InMe 25

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Hearing

The caster is able to sense anyone who is currently aware of her. A person's attention, regardless how fleeting, is heard as a musical chime, and each individual is represented by a different tone. She doesn't detect any information about them other than they are aware of her existence. The information gained from this spell is only relevant for the moment that the spell is cast, and is only applicable to those who have an active interest in the caster's presence. This spell operates by interrogating the common sense (see ''Art &amp; Academe'', page 33) for images of the caster.

(Base 10, +3 Hearing)

<span id="funding-the-blackmailers-purse"></span>
== '''Funding the Blackmailer's Purse''' ==

InMe 30

R: Eye, D: Mom, T: Ind

The caster reveals a deep-seated secret in the mind of the target. The caster must have some idea about the subject of the secret; this spell cannot be used to &quot;fish&quot; the mind for a random secret. Instead, based on a piece of scant information, the spell reveals all the sordid details of a shameful deed, embarrassing moment, or concealed history. For example, Persephone notices that Credo the grog flinches every time the word &quot;chalice&quot; is mentioned. This spell will reveal that in her youth Credo stole the sacramental chalice from her local church, that she dared not fence it after committing the deed, and that it lies buried in the packed earth beneath her sleeping pallet.

(Base 25, +1 Eye)

<span id="my-old-and-dear-friend"></span>
==== '''My Old and Dear Friend''' ====

MuMe 20

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target's memory is altered so that the caster is &quot;remembered&quot; to have performed a major favor for him in the recent past. The caster gets to choose in what manner she appears in the altered memory. The target cannot be convinced of the falsity of this memory until the duration of the spell expires, at which point he realizes the deception.

(Base 4, +1 Eye, +2 Sun, +1 complexity)

<span id="i-was-never-here"></span>
=== '''I Was Never Here''' ===

PeMe 5

R: Eye, D: Mom, T: Ind

The target forgets meeting the caster. Prior contact between the caster and the target must be limited to a brief and relatively insignificant event occurring within the last day, and includes the casting of this spell. This spell is perfect for making a target forget seeing the maga overtly cast a spell, or causing a sentry to forget letting her through a gate. However, a person cannot be made to forget who stabbed him.

(Base 4, +1 Eye)

<span id="terram-spells-4"></span>
=== ''Terram Spells'' ===

<span id="short-step-of-the-ghost"></span>
=== '''Short Step of the Ghost''' ===

MuTe(Au) 25

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Part

The stone in a section of wall momentarily becomes as permeable as mist, allowing the caster to step through. The wall solidifies behind her. It affects an area as large as a door, but the wall cannot be more than one foot thick. The highly unnatural substance that the section of wall briefly becomes does not affect its structural integrity.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +1 Part, +1 affect stone)

<span id="invisible-hand-of-the-thief"></span>
==== '''Invisible Hand of the Thief''' ====

ReTe 20

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Instantly transports any single object to the hand of the caster. The object must be within range and be visible to the caster. Objects that are being held or worn can be affected by this spell, and may need casting requisites for material other than that covered by the Form of Terram — for example, Animal for wool, leather, bone, or ivory; and Herbam for wood, rope, or linen. If the target object is protected by Magic Resistance (such as an item worn by a magus), then the spell must have sufficient Penetration.

The base level for this effect is that for a very unnatural motion. However, for instant transportation the Rego Corpus guidelines are consulted, which adds one magnitude for instant transportation over 5 paces, two magnitudes over 50 paces, and so forth.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-48"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

(base 4, +2 Voice, +1 affect restrained objects, +1 for 50 paces transportation)

<span id="enchanted-items-8"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Persephone prefers to craft items in the form of jewelry, since most of the items are designed for her own use or that of her sister Kore.

<span id="coin-of-mirth"></span>
=== ''Coin of Mirth'' ===

Persephone makes these Charged Items in reasonable quantity, and keeps them on hand should she need a distraction. She makes them in the form of a common coin of the realm, usually something of low value that she distributes to her unknowing dupes in exchange for street food or trinkets. She triggers them remotely using her ''Triggering the Distant Power'' spell, which can activate several coins at once. The spectacle of two or three people simultaneously erupting into spontaneous laughter is usually sufficient distraction to allow Persephone to cast a spell with vulgar magical effects and remain unnoticed.

<span id="touch-of-hilarity"></span>
==== '''Touch of Hilarity''' ====

CrMe 10

Pen 0, charged item

R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Ind

When activated, this coin causes the person who it is touching to burst into uncontrollable laughter. The target hoots, howls, chortles, guffaws, or otherwise expresses loud hilarity. The trigger for this effect is typically a chuckling sound.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Diam)

<span id="bracelet-of-clandestine-insignificance"></span>
=== ''Bracelet of Clandestine Insignificance'' ===

This simple silver bangle is a Lesser Enchantment created by Persephone to avoid unwanted attention. It cost her two pawns of vis to make.

MuIm 14

Pen 0, 24/day

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

The visual and auditory species shed by the target acquire an anamorphic nature, tricking the viewer's mind into misinterpreting what he is seeing. As long as the wearer of the bracelet acts in a non-threatening manner and draws no attention to herself, no-one will pay her the slightest notice. Their attention simply glides off her as being mundane and insignificant. For example, she can walk through a crowded room and no-one will notice her passing. But should she stop to talk to anyone, the illusion is lost for that individual. For the illusion to work, the victim must fail a Perception roll with a –3 penalty (since the illusion involves two senses). The Ease Factor for this roll is equal to the sum of a die roll, the victim's Inattentive (or similar) Personality Trait, the wielder's Perception, and the wielder's Finesse score. The victim's total must exceed the Ease Factor by 3 or more to reveal the illusion as false. See ''Houses of Hermes: Societates'', pages 65–66 for more details of anamorphic illusions.

Persephone is careful not to wear the bracelet wherever she may be in the company of magi, since she could be accused of scrying if they perceive the illusion.

(base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Conc; +5 item maintains concentration, +5 24/day)

<span id="signet-of-hallam"></span>
=== ''Signet of Hallam'' ===

This Invested item effects a specific disguise — one impersonating Lord Richard of Hallam — that is commonly used by Persephone, Kore, or one of the maga's trusted agents. The ring is made with two trigger words, one of which is used by male characters, and the other by female characters to initiate all of the same effects and also change the sexual characteristics of the target to those of a male. When the trigger word is said, each effect is initiated in the order presented below, one per round.

Lord Richard of Hallam was a close friend of Persephone's covenant, whose collusion proved very useful in a number of her schemes. When Richard died unexpectedly the covenant lost a powerful ally, so Persephone used her spells to take the place of the minor lord. After manufacturing an excuse for his prolonged absence, she took the time to make this item so that anyone could play

the role of the lord. She has gradually improved the efficacy of the ring over time, and has been handsomely compensated by her covenant. Hallam's widow Joanna is aware of the subterfuge and is glad of it, since the second husband her family would match her with is a bore and an idiot.

The covenant is careful not to use the role of Lord Richard to meddle in mundane politics, but merely to defend their own interests in the region. Persephone has not been so conscientious when she takes over the disguise, though. After a problem involving a churchman with the Magic Sensitivity Ability, she added an effect to hide the various magical transformations.

The item is a signet ring made of gold, with the seal made from onyx. It was opened with 12 pawns of vis, and has been invested with 11 pawns' worth of effects.

<span id="face-of-lord-richard-of-hallam"></span>
== '''Face of Lord Richard of Hallam''' ==

MuCo 16 R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Part Pen 0, 2/day

This spell works just like ''Disguise of the New Visage'', except that the effect can only duplicate the face of a single person — that of Lord Richard of Hallam. He has black hair and green eyes, and is clean shaven. The effect can be canceled at will, but can only be activated twice per day.

This effect is triggered when the wearer of the ring rubs it and says either trigger word &quot;vir Hallamus&quot; or &quot;mulier Hallamae.&quot;

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +1 Part; +1 2/day, +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="voice-of-lord-richard-of-hallam"></span>
==== '''Voice of Lord Richard of Hallam''' ====

MuIm 9

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

Pen 0, 2/day

This spell works just like ''Voice of the Leucrota'', except that the effect can only duplicate the voice of a single person — that of Lord Richard of Hallam. He has a deep voice with a distinctive Norman accent. The effect can be canceled at will, but can only be activated twice per day.

This effect is triggered when the wearer of the ring rubs it and says either trigger word &quot;vir Hallamus&quot; or &quot;mulier Hallamae.&quot;

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +1 Conc; +1 2/day, +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="clothes-of-lord-richard-of-hallam"></span>
= '''Clothes of Lord Richard of Hallam''' =

MuAn(He) 16 R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Group Pen 0, 2/day

This spell works just like ''Remake the Tailor's Craft'', except that the effect can only change the target's clothes into those of a specific description: woolen doublet and hose of black with red ornamentation, a white linen shirt, leather riding boots and a riding cape. The outfit comes with a stylish felt hat bearing a red feather, and gloves.

The effect can be canceled at will, but can only be activated twice per day. This effect is triggered when the wearer of the ring rubs it and says either trigger word &quot;vir Hallamus&quot; or &quot;mulier Hallamae.&quot;

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Group; +1 2/day, +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="body-of-the-virile-male"></span>
==== '''Body of the Virile Male''' ====

MuCo 11 R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind Pen 0, 2/day

The target's body assumes male physical characteristics without altering other aspects of appearance. The effect can be canceled at will, but can only be activated twice per day. This effect is triggered when the wearer of the ring rubs it and says the trigger word &quot;mulier Hallamae.&quot;

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc; +1 2/day, +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="masking-the-odor-of-magic"></span>
=== '''Masking the Odor of Magic''' ===

PeVi 34

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group

Pen 0, constant effect

Prevents the detection of any of the effects in this item by magic, unless the Intellego Vim spell is greater than 30th level. A character with the Magic Sensitivity Supernatural Ability must have a score of 6 or greater to detect the magic of this item.

(Base effect (5), +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Group; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger)

<span id="pigeon-amulet"></span>
=== ''Pigeon Amulet'' ===

Named after the bird stamped on its surface, this brass coin-shaped amulet has a hole in the top allowing it to be threaded onto a necklace or leather thong. Each one is made as a pair from the same batch of metal, and are separated at the end of the enchantment process. One half is kept by the maga as an Arcane Connection to the other half; Persephone neatly labels these with the name of the owner of the other half, and hangs them on her wall. These Arcane Connections typically last for years. Persephone distributes these Charged Items to potential agents who she may wish to recruit at a later date, or to skilled operatives to whom she issues personal instructions.

<span id="take-me-home"></span>
==== '''Take Me Home''' ====

ReMe 25

Pen 0, charged item

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

When activated, this amulet causes the person who it is touching to have a nagging desire to travel to a place that is designated when the item is made. The sensation persists throughout the effect's duration, and a week of this is usually sufficient to prompt the target to manufacture a reason to make the journey. The trigger for this effect is typically the buzz of a bee, which can be caused remotely using Persephone's ''Triggering the Distant Power'' spell.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +3 Moon)

<span id="fides-sororis"></span>
=== ''Fides Sororis'' ===

This Invested Item is physically the twin of Persephone's talisman, made at the same time from the same batch of gold, and bearing seven strands of the maga's hair as a fixed Arcane Connection. The ring was prepared for enchantment with 10 pawns of vis, and has been invested with 5 pawns' worth of effects. Persephone gave this ring to her sister Kore.

<span id="repulse-the-unwanted-attention"></span>
== '''Repulse the Unwanted Attention''' ==

ReCo 35

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

Pen 0, 24/day

This spell is identical to the effect in Persephone's talisman, except that it was invented at Range Touch since this item is not a talisman.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +1 Conc; +5 maintains concentration, +5 24/day)

<span id="adopt-the-sisters-face"></span>
==== '''Adopt the Sister's Face''' ====

MuCo(Vi) 25 R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Part Pen 0, 24/day

The target's face is changed to be that of Persephone of Tytalus. The face is always that of Persephone's current appearance due to the presence of the indefinite Arcane Connection wrapped around the ring. The Vim requisite in this effect taints the target with magic, so that she also appears to have The Gift by those who investigate her magically, although the wearer temporarily gains the Magical Air Flaw. The effect is triggered by kissing the ring.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +1 Part, +1 requisite; +5 item maintains concentration, +5 24/day)

<span id="talisman-amor-sororis"></span>
= ''Talisman: Amor Sororis'' =

Persephone's talisman is a simple gold ring. Wound around the unadorned band are seven strands of her sister Kore's hair, which are a fixed Arcane Connection. Kore possesses an identical ring with seven strands of Persephone's hair, but the enchantments in

<span id="magi-of-hermes-49"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

this ring are very different (see Fides Sororis earlier). The ring was prepared for enchantment with 10 pawns of vis, and currently has one pawns' worth of space left.

Persephone has instilled three effects into her talisman so far, as listed below.

'''Attunements''' +4 transform self +4 protect self

+4 nobility

<span id="repulse-the-unwanted-attention-1"></span>
= '''Repulse the Unwanted Attention''' =

ReCo 30 R: Per, D: Conc, T: Ind Pen 0, 24/day

The ring confers a personal ward against people on the wearer of the ring. Only those without Magic Resistance are affected. If she is simply walking through a crowd the people are nudged aside to allow her to pass. Warded individuals cannot act across a ward in any manner, therefore if she is attacked, her opponents' blows always go wide, causing them to miss. She is not protected from thrown weapons or missiles, though. The effect is triggered by holding the hand wearing the ring in front of the body, palm facing outward.

(Base 15, +1 Conc; +5 item maintains concentration, +5 24/day)

<span id="watchful-eye-of-the-caring-sister"></span>
= '''Watchful Eye of the Caring Sister''' =

InCo 25

R: Arc, D: Mom, T: Ind Pen 0, unlimited uses

Reveals the general state of health of anyone to whom the item's user has an Arcane Connection. Naturally, Persephone uses this effect to check on the status of her sister when the two are apart. The effect is triggered by turning the ring three times clockwise on the finger.

(Base 4, +4 Arc; +10 unlimited uses)

<span id="opening-the-intangible-tunnel"></span>
=== '''Opening the Intangible Tunnel''' ===

ReVi 25 R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Ind Pen 0, 1/day

As the spell of the same name, except that the talisman takes the strain of concentrating on the ''Intangible Tunnel''. Spells up to 20th level can be carried to the target of the Arcane Connection, which is commonly Kore. The effect is triggered by moving the ring from its customary position on the ring finger of the left hand, over to the middle finger.

(Base effect, +4 Arc, +1 Conc; +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="chapter-eleven"></span>
=== ''Chapter Eleven'' ===

<span id="petalichus-of-verditus"></span>
= ''Petalichus of Verditus'' =

'''Concept:''' Spinning webs of intrigue through the use of secret Mysteries, this crafter of seemingly humble devices is as secretive, manipulative, and vindictive as his arachnid familiar implies.

Petalichus the Weaver of Veriditus is the latest in the line of Arachne's Children, a diminished cult of weavers within House Verditius. He learned to weave magic into the most humble of devices, while others in his House wrought great weapons and exquisite rings. But beyond his House, his learning in philosophy and the artes liberales brought him to the attention of others, and he was soon adopted into the Cononites, a secretive mystical cult within the Order of Hermes that seeks out, reveres, and safeguards the more esoteric works of Conon of Samos and other Greek scholars such as Euclid, Apollonius, and Archimedes. The cult taught Petalichus its secret magic, and in return Petalichus crafted tools and devices to help its members use that learning more effectively. Petalichus the Weaver is as secretive, manipulative, and vindictive as his arachnid familiar leads others to suspect. Though his crafts may be humble, his ambitions are lofty and he often brings the full power of his knowledge and craft to bear on his enemies. He is a dangerous man, operating out of sight and through agents and proxies, concealed behind a web of deceit and confusion.

<span id="petalichus-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Petalichus at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per +2, Pre 0, Com 0, Str –1, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik –1

'''Size''': 0

'''Age''': 25 (25) '''Decrepitude''': 0 '''Warping Score''': 0 (0)

'''Confidence Score''': 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (cloth); Inventive Genius, Puissant Artes Liberales, Planetary Magic, Puissant Finesse, Puissant Magic Theory, Self-Confident, Verditius Magic; Enemies (Solar Magnus), Weak Spontaneous Magic; Slow Caster, Driven (find the lost works), Infamous

'''Personality Traits''': Acquisitive +1, Decisive +1, Hungry for Knowledge +2

'''Reputations''': Ill-tempered 4 (Magi of Thebes) '''Combat''':

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack N/A, Defense +0, Damage N/A

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack +3, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Knife:'' Init –1, Attack +5, Defense +1, Damage +1

'''Soak''': +0

'''Fatigue Levels''': OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities''': Artes Liberales 3+2 (astronomy), Awareness 1 (searching), Bargain 1 (enchantments), Brawl 1 (Knife), Clothiery 1 (shirts), Code of Hermes 1 (political intrigue), Constantinople Lore 3 (geography), Finesse 1+2 (precision), Greek 5 (magical terms), Guile 1 (lying to authority), Intrigue 1 (alliances), Latin 3 (Hermetic usage), Leadership 1 (magi), Magic Lore 2 (magical traditions), Magic Theory 4+2 (enchanting items), Verditius Cult Lore 1 (initiations), Parma Magica 1 (Ignem), Penetration 1 (Ignem), Philosophiae 2 (ceremonial magic), Weaver 3 (linen)

'''Arts''': '''Cr''' 0, '''In''' 5, '''Mu''' 0, '''Pe''' 0, '''Re''' 7, '''An''' 3, '''Aq''' 0, '''Au''' 0, '''Co''' 6, '''He''' 3, '''Ig''' 5, '''Im''' 0, '''Me''' 3, '''Te''' 0, '''Vi''' 2

'''Twilight Scars''': None

'''Equipment''': Good-quality clothes, wizardly robes, workman's clothes, loom

'''Encumbrance''': 0 (0) '''Spells Known''':

''Unmake This Cloth'' (PeAn 10/+3*)

''A Day's Worth of Spinning'' (ReAn 10/+13*)

''A Day's Worth of Weaving'' (ReAn 10/+13*) ''The Even Hand of The Determined Weaver''

(Re(Cr)An 5/+3*)

''The Weaver's Subtle Art'' (ReAn 5/+13*) ''Arachne's Tuition'' (ReCo 20/+13)

''Spasms of the Uncontrolled Hand'' (ReCo 5/+13)

''Lamp without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+5)

''Tales of the Ashes'' (InIg 5/+10)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+5)

''Sight of the Transparent Motive'' (InMe 10/+8)

''Aura of Rightful Authority'' (ReMe 20/+10)

''Scales of the Magical Weight'' (InVi 5/+7)

\* includes Magical Focus

'''Vis''': Petalichus rarely carries vis himself unless he is sure of needing it.

'''Appearance''': Petalichus is a good-looking young man, though somewhat pale and intense behind his slick dark hair. His bearing has suffered from long years spent learning his crafts, but he dresses himself in elegant finery. He is precise and the decoration on his clothes matches this, tending toward geometric, clean, and even shapes.

'''Sigil''': Petalichus's magic manifests as threads that weave an effect, and traces of magic feel like frayed edges. He votes with a silver wand in the shape of a large needle.

'''Casting Tools''': Petalichus uses a number of oversized needles pinned into his cuffs, each corresponding to a different spell. Each needle carries a different thread, and as the spell is cast the needle is pulled from his cuff and pierced through a cloth held in the other hand.

<span id="petalichus-15-years"></span>
=== ''Petalichus +15 years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per +2, Pre 0, Com 0, Str –1, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik –1

'''Size''': 0

'''Age''': 40 (36)

'''Decrepitude''': 0

'''Warping Score''': 3 (0)

'''Confidence Score''': 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (Cloth); Inventive Genius, Items of Quality, Planetary Magic, Puissant Artes Liberales, Puissant Magic Theory, Puissant Finesse, Self-Confident, Verditius Magic; Weak Spontaneous Magic, Enemies (Solar Magnus); Driven (Find the lost works), Hubris, Infamous, Slow Caster

'''Personality Traits''': Acquisitive +1, Decisive +1, Hubris (Arrogant) +2, Hungry for Knowledge +2

'''Reputations''': Ill-tempered 4 (Magi of Thebes) '''Combat''':

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack N/A, Defense +0, Damage N/A

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack +3, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Knife:'' Init –1, Attack +5, Defense +1, Damage +1

'''Soak''': +0

'''Fatigue Levels''': OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities''': Artes Liberales 4+2 (astronomy), Awareness 1 (searching), Bargain 1 (enchantments), Brawl 1 (knife), Clothiery 2 (shirts), Code of Hermes 1 (political intrigue), Constantinople Lore 3 (geography), Finesse 3+2 (precision), Greek 5 (magical terms), Guile 1 (lying to authority), Intrigue 1 (alliances), Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Leadership 1 (magi), Magic Lore 2 (magical traditions), Magic Theory 4+2 (enchanting items) , Verditius Cult Lore 3 (Initiations), Parma Magica 2 (Ignem), Penetration 2 (Ignem), Philosophiae 4 (ceremonial magic), Weaver 4 (linen)

'''Arts''': '''Cr''' 15, '''In''' 9, '''Mu''' 1, '''Pe''' 7, '''Re''' 7, '''An''' 3, '''Aq''' 0, '''Au''' 0, '''Co''' 9, '''He''' 3, '''Ig''' 5, '''Im''' 0, '''Me''' 9, '''Te''' 2, '''Vi''' 2

'''Twilight Scars''': None

'''Equipment''': Good-quality clothes, wizardly robes, workman's clothes, loom, cloth shears (invested with ''The Perfect Fit'' as described later), tapestry doorhanging (as described later).

'''Encumbrance''': 0 (0)

'''Spells Known''':

''Unmake This Cloth'' (PeAn 10/+13*)

''Bind Fast'' (ReAn(He) 5/+13*)

''A Day's Worth of Spinning'' (ReAn 10/+13*)

''A Day's Worth of Weaving'' (ReAn 10/+13*)

''The Even Hand of The Determined Weaver'' (Re(Cr)An 5/+13*)

''The Treacherous Cloak'' (ReAn(He) 5/+13*)

''The Weaver's Subtle Art'' (ReAn 5/+13*)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-50"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

''Arachne's Tuition'' (ReCo 20/+16) ''Spasms of the Uncontrolled Hand'' (ReCo 5/+16) ''Lamp without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+20) ''Tales of the Ashes'' (InIg 5/+14) ''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+9) ''Sight of the Transparent Motive'' (InMe 10/+18) ''Aura of Rightful Authority'' (ReMe 20/+16) ''Scales of the Magical Weight'' (InVi 5/+11)

\* includes Magical Focus '''Vis''': Petalichus has started to display the fruits of his labors openly, and often wears amulets and rings carrying several pawns of vis, usually Rego.

'''Appearance''': In the 15 years since his gauntle,t Petalichus has grown a long black beard, which, like his hair, he binds into cords with threads and strips of cloth. His natural ill-temper has combined with the hubris of his craft to give him a stern, disagreeable countenance.

'''Activities in the last 15 years''': Over the course of the last 15 years, Petalichus began his journey through the Verditius mysteries taking his first initiation. He also began to stretch his mundane knowledge, seeking out books and correspondences concerning mathematics, geometry, and astrology. While he has not yet encountered the Cononites, they know of him and have been watching his progress. Petalichus invented his (level 8) longevity ritual during this period, and it takes the form of a ritual unbinding and binding of his beard with specially prepared cords.

<span id="petalichus-30-years"></span>
=== ''Petalichus +30 years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per +2, Pre 0, Com 0, Str –1, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik –1

'''Size''': 0 '''Age''': 55 (43) '''Decrepitude''': 0 '''Warping Score''': 4 (17) '''Confidence Score''': 2 (15)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Celestial Magic, Major Magical Focus (Cloth); Hermetic Numerology, Hermetic Geometry, Inventive Genius, Items of Quality, Puissant Artes Liberales, Puissant Magic Theory, Puissant Finesse, Self-Confident, Verditius Magic; Weak Spontaneous Magic, Enemies (Solar Magnus); Difficult Spontaneous Magic, Driven (Find the lost works), Hubris, Infamous, Slow Caster

'''Personality Traits''': Acquisitive +2, Decisive +1, Hubris (Arrogant) +3, Hungry for Knowledge +2

'''Reputations''': Ill-tempered 4 (Magi of Thebes) '''Combat''':

''Dodge:'' Init –1, Attack N/A, Defense +0, Damage N/A

''Fist:'' Init –1, Attack +3, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Knife:'' Init –1, Attack +5, Defense +1, Damage +1

'''Soak''': +0

'''Fatigue Levels''': OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities''': Artes Liberales 4+2 (astronomy), Awareness 1 (searching), Brawl 1 (knife), Clothiery 2 (shirts), Code of Hermes 1 (political intrigue), Cononites Cult Lore 4 (Initiating others), Constantinople Lore 3 (geography), Finesse 3+2 (precision), Greek 5 (magical terms), Guile 1 (lying to authority), Intrigue 1 (alliances), Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Leadership 1 (magi), Magic Lore 2 (magical traditions), Magic Theory 5 +2 (enchanting items), Verditius Cult Lore 3 (Initiations), Parma Magica 3 (Ignem), Penetration 3 (Ignem), Philosophiae 4 (ceremonial magic), Weaver 4 (linen)

'''Arts''': '''Cr''' 15, '''In''' 13, '''Mu''' 1, '''Pe''' 10, '''Re''' 13, '''An''' 3, '''Aq''' 0, '''Au''' 1, '''Co''' 11, '''He''' 3, '''Ig''' 5, '''Im''' 13, '''Me''' 9, '''Te''' 9, '''Vi''' 9

'''Twilight Scars''': His fingers are longer than is natural.

'''Equipment''': Good-quality clothes, wizardly robes, workman's clothes, loom, cloth shears (invested with ''The Perfect Fit'' as described later), tapestry doorhanging (as described later), selection of casting tablets, Distaff of Petalichus talisman (as described later).

'''Encumbrance''': 0 (0) '''Spells Known''':

''Unmake This Cloth'' (PeAn 10/+16*)

''Bind Fast'' (ReAn(He) 5/+19*)

''A Day's Worth of Spinning'' (ReAn 10/+19*)

''A Day's Worth of Weaving'' (ReAn 10/+19*)

''The Even Hand of The Determined Weaver'' (Re(Cr)An 5/+19*)

''The Treacherous Cloak'' (ReAn(He) 5/+19*)

''The Weaver's Subtle Art'' (ReAn 5/+19*)

''Arachne's Tuition'' (ReCo 20/+24)

''Remain Within Those Walls'' (ReCo 20/+24)

''Spasms of the Uncontrolled Hand'' (ReCo 5/+24)

''Lamp without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+20)

''Tales of the Ashes'' (InIg 5/+18)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+26)

''Sight of the Transparent Motive'' (InMe 10/+22)

''Aura of Rightful Authority'' (ReMe 20/+22)

''(Rote) Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+26) ''Scales of the Magical Weight'' (InVi 5/+22)

''(Rote) Sense the Weight of Divine Power'' (InVi 3/+28)

''(Rote) Sense the Weight of Faerie Power'' (InVi 3/+28)

''(Rote) Sense the Weight of Infernal Power'' (InVi 3/+28)

''(Rote) Sense the Weight of Magical Power'' (InVi 3/+28)

\* includes Magical Focus

'''Vis''': Petalichus carries a number of pawns as a display of Hermetic wealth.

'''Appearance''': While his longevity ritual has helped him retain some youth, Petalichus carries himself with the bearing of an aging man. He is heavier and his clothing reflects this; he wears heavy elaborate robes edged with embossed leather, and covered with ornate mystical and mathematical symbols.

'''Activities in the last 15 years''': During this period of Petalichus' life, he was approached by the Cononites and initiated into its secret society. He gained their trust quickly. He has all but turned his back on his traditional Verditius Mysteries. It is worth noting that the Initiations Petalichus has endured up to this point have left him unable to work Spontaneous magic, as he now suffers from both the Weak and Difficult Spontaneous Magic flaws. He is reliant on a number of casting tablets supplied by his brother Cononites (see ''Covenants'', page 89) for many simple spells. Assume that Petalichus has any reasonable Intellego spell up to fourth magnitude. He also began to experiment with creating ligatures (''Art &amp; Academe'', page 68) at this time, another influence from the Cononites.

<span id="petalichus-45-years"></span>
=== ''Petalichus +45 years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per +2, Pre 0, Com 0, Str –1, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik –1

'''Size''': 0

'''Age''': 70 (54)

'''Decrepitude''': 0

'''Warping Score''': 6 (7)

'''Confidence Score''': 2 (15)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Celestial Magic, Major Magical

'''Personality Traits''': Acquisitive +2, Decisive +1, Hubris (Arrogant) +4, Hungry for Knowledge +2, Loyal (Idmon) +3

'''Reputations''': Ill-tempered 4 (Magi of Thebes) '''Combat''':

''Dodge:'' Init: –1, Attack N/A, Defense +0, Damage N/A

''Fist:'' Init: –1, Attack +3, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Knife:'' Init: –1, Attack +5, Defense +1, Damage +1

'''Soak''': +0

'''Fatigue Levels''': OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities''': Artes Liberales 4+2 (astronomy), Awareness 1 (searching), Bargain 1 (enchantments), Brawl 1 (knife), Clothiery 2 (shirts), Code of Hermes 1 (political intrigue), Cononites Cult Lore 4 (Initiating others), Constantinople Lore 3 (geography), Finesse 3+2 (precision), Greek 5 (magical terms), Guile 3 (lying to authority), Intrigue 2 (alliances), Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Leadership 2 (magi), Magic Lore 2 (magical traditions), Magic Theory 7+2 (enchanting items), Verditius Cult Lore 3 (Initiations), Parma Magica 4 (Ignem), Penetration 4 (Ignem), Philosophiae 4 (ceremonial magic), Weaver 4 (linen)

'''Arts''': '''Cr''' 15, '''In''' 13, '''Mu''' 3, '''Pe''' 10, '''Re''' 13, '''An''' 11, '''Aq''' 1, '''Au''' 2, '''Co''' 11, '''He''' 13, '''Ig''' 5, '''Im''' 13, '''Me''' 12, '''Te''' 11, '''Vi''' 8

'''Twilight Scars''': His fingers are longer than is natural.

'''Equipment''': Good-quality clothes, wizardly robes, workman's clothes, loom, cloth shears (invested with ''The Perfect Fi''t as described later), tapestry doorhanging (as described later), selection of casting tablets, Greater Numerologist's Book (Book Bonus +8 and enchanted with ''Sense the Hour'' and the &quot;Halysis&quot; effects as described later), The Map of Many Places (as described later), three candles invested with ''The Light of Fell Disease'', one ''Sheet of Flame'', and ''The Convenient Door'' (as

described later), Distaff of Petalichus talisman (as described later).

'''Encumbrance''': 0 (0)

'''Spells Known''':

''Unmake This Cloth'' (PeAn 10/+30*)

''Bind Fast'' (ReAn(He) 5/+34*) Mastery 1 (Fast-Cast)

''A Day's Worth of Spinning'' (ReAn 10/+33*)

''A Day's Worth of Weaving'' (ReAn 10/+33*)

''The Even Hand of The Determined Weaver'' (Re(Cr)An 5/+33*)

''The Treacherous Cloak'' (ReAn(He) 5/+34*) Mastery 1 (Penetration)

''The Weaver's Subtle Art'' (ReAn 5/+33*)

''Arachne's Tuition'' (ReCo 20/+24)

''Remain Within Those Walls'' (ReCo 20/+24)

''Spasms of the Uncontrolled Hand'' (ReCo 5/+24)

''Lamp without Flame'' (CrIg 10/+20)

''Tales of the Ashes'' (InIg 5/+18)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+26)

''To See As Though a Plethron Distant'' (InIm 25/+26)

''The Unwelcoming Room'' (CrMe 30/+27)

''Sight of the Transparent Motive'' (InMe 10/+26) Mastery 1 (Still casting)

''(Rote) Recollection of Memories Never Quite Lived'' (MuMe 4/+29)

''Aura of Rightful Authority'' (ReMe 20/+25)

''(Rote) Scribe the Perfect Circle'' (Re(Cr)Te 4/+38)

''(Rote) Unseen Arm'' (ReTe 5/+38)

''Scales of the Magical Weight'' (InVi 5/+21)

''(Rote) Sense the Weight of Divine Power'' (InVi 3/+35)

''(Rote) Sense the Weight of Faerie Power'' (InVi 3/+35)

''(Rote) Sense the Weight of Infernal Power'' (InVi 3/+35)

''(Rote) Sense the Weight of Magical Power'' (InVi 3/+35)

''A Day's Grace'' (ReVi 30/+21)

\* includes Magic Focus

'''Vis''': Aware of his limitations with Spontaneous magic, Petalichus retains a personal supply of Rego vis in order to boost the penetration of the few offensive spells he knows.

'''Appearance''': Now looking like a man in his mid-fifties, with his twisted and bound beard turning grey, his hair receding, and his brows thick and protruding, Petalichus has the presence of authority that only maturity can bring. He is adorned with devices (both of his own making, and others the provenance of which may never be certain), rings, his talisman, a large book slung in a satchel, his heavy robes, and Idmon his sinister arachnid familiar.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-51"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

'''Activities in the last 15 years''': Much of Petalichus' time during this period was spent crafting his numerologist's book, copies of which he supplied to the Cononites cult. His ambitious nature also asserted itself and he created a number of items with overtly offensive aims. As Petalichus approached his seventieth year, he finally bested his age-old enemy Solar Magnus while both were scouring Canterbury for an ancient text. His future is uncertain from this point onward, though his friends within the Cononites may exploit their connections and influence in his defense.

<span id="new-spells-9"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Petalichus has developed these spells.

<span id="animal-spells-8"></span>
=== ''Animal Spells'' ===

<span id="unmake-this-cloth"></span>
=== '''Unmake This Cloth''' ===

PeAn(He) 10

R:Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This spell unravels an item made of cloth, whether it be wool, linen, cotton, or silk. An Herbam casting requisite is required for for plant-based cloth.

The garment, tapestry, or other item is disassembled carefully with all knots undone and stitching unpicked.

<span id="familiar-idmon-the-spider"></span>
=== ''Familiar: Idmon the Spider'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int –3, Per –2, Pre –5, Com –6, Str –10, Sta +1, Dex +3, Qik +4

'''Magic Might''': 10 (Animal)

'''Size''': –6

'''Natural Qualities''': Ambush Predator, Grapple, Loathsome Appearance, Venomous

'''Virtues and Flaws''': True Friend (Petalichus), Piercing Gaze; Envious (Minor)

'''Personality Traits''': Sinister +2, Loyal (Petalichus) +3

'''Reputations''': None

'''Combat''':

''Dodge:'' Init +4, Attack N/A, Defense +7, Damage N/A

''Teeth:'' Init +4, Attack +10, Defense +9, Damage –9

''Grapple:'' Init +4, Attack +6, Defense +7, Damage N/A

'''Soak''': +1

'''Fatigue Levels''': OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1), –3 (2), –5 (3), Incapacitated (4), Dead (5)

'''Abilities''': Awareness 4 (prey), Brawl 3 (teeth), Climb 5 (webs), Hunt 4 (insects), Greek 5 (magical terms), Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Penetration 4 (Mentem), Stealth 4 (stalking), Survival 3 (home area), Weaver 5 (webs)

'''Powers''':

''Panic of the Trembling Heart'' (CrMe 15) 2

points, Init +3

''Weaver's Trap of Webs'' (CrAn 35) 4 points, Init +1

'''Vis''': 1 pawn of Rego in its legs.

'''Gold Cord''': 2, '''Silver Cord''': 1, '''Bronze Cord''': 2

'''Bond Powers''':

''Mental Communication'', as per the level 15 effect in '''ArM5''', page 105. This effect works on both Idmon and Petalichus.

''Shared Senses'', as per the level 30 effect in '''ArM5''', page 105. Only Idmon's senses are shared with Petalichus.

'''Appearance''': Idmon is an unnaturally large, fragile-looking spider with long, angular legs jutting out from a smooth armored body. Idmon's many eyes glitter and they reflect the bright patterns that cover its carapace.

Petalichus named his familiar Idmon after the father of Arachne, but if the spider has a true name it has not yet revealed it even to Petalichus. Idmon often travels with Petalichus, but is aware of his physical limitations so prefers to remain close to his master. However, on many occasions the magus sends his familiar out into the night to find and retrieve an Arcane Connection to a new target.

Petalichus found his familiar somewhat late in life, when he was into his mid-fifties.

The item is reduced to discrete piles of thread. A Dexterity + Finesse simple roll determines how orderly these piles are arranged and sorted.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Herbam requisite)

<span id="bind-fast"></span>
==== '''Bind Fast''' ====

ReAn(He) 5

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Group

The targets' clothes seek out and bind themselves to the nearest other object, moving or not. If the members of a group are standing sufficiently close, this spell binds them together. The magic lasts just long enough for the clothes to bind themselves into knots, and then dissipates allowing the targets to free themselves by undoing or cutting the knotted cloth.

While all of a target's surface clothing will writhe and seek out something to bind to, there is no guarantee that all of it can. If the clothes are close-fitting, or there is not enough slack in the garment, the cloth will simply flail for a moment and then fall dormant. If there is sufficient cloth but there is nothing within its reach, the target may still become bound up as his clothes wrap and tie themselves around his limbs.

Affected targets suffer a –3 penalty to all subsequent rolls for physical actions, but can free themselves by either dedicating a round to cutting or tearing the clothing, or by spending two rounds working to untie the knots.

Storyguides may wish to give other options to particularly large, strong, or dexterous characters.

Until members of the target group have freed themselves, successive castings of this spell have no further effect.

(Base 1, +2 Voice, +2 Group)

<span id="a-days-worth-of-spinning"></span>
=== '''A Day's Worth of Spinning''' ===

ReAn 10

R:Touch, D: Mom, T: Group

One of the first spells taught to Petalichus by his mater, this spell cleans, cards, and spins a whole fleece, or a bale of cotton or flax, into thread in a matter of moments. If dye is available when the spell is cast, the thread can be dyed as the caster directs. A Herbam casting requisite is required for plant-based cloth.

This is an Average task for a mundane spinner, so the caster must make a Perception + Finesse (precision) + stress die roll against an Ease Factor of 12 (Craft Ease Factor 9 + 3 for using Craft Magic).

Failing the roll results in a badly spun fleece, probably with flecks of dirt still clinging to the thread. A botched roll ruins the fleece outright, though this may not be immediately apparent.

See ''Covenants'', page 49 for more on Rego Craft Magic.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Group)

<span id="a-days-worth-of-weaving"></span>
==== '''A Day's Worth of Weaving''' ====

ReAn 10

R:Touch, D: Mom, T: Group

This spell is exceptionally good at making simple cloth, but casters may find it difficult to create cloth of any great quality or highly patterned tapestries. The table below lists the base Ease Factors for weaving bolts of cloth in a single casting. Treat each bolt of cloth as being two paces in length by one pace wide. Successive castings can extend the current bolt of cloth rather than creating a new item. Members of Petalichus' lineage have traditionally used this spell in practicing their Finesse.

The caster makes a Perception + Finesse (precision) + stress die and compares the result against the table below.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Cloth Bolt's L<br>Quality E
! evel C
! raft Magic<br>ase Factor
|-
| Shoddy
| Trivial
| 6
|-
| Standard
| Simple
| 9
|-
| Superior
| Average
| 15
|-
| Excellent
| Hard
| 18
|}

It is a harder task to create patterned cloth. A simple repeating pattern adds +3 to the Ease Factor, while an image or words woven into the cloth adds +6.

See ''City &amp; Guild'', page 67 for more on item quality. A Herbam casting requisite is required for work involving cotton or linen.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Group)

<span id="the-even-hand-of-the-determined-weaver"></span>
= '''The Even Hand of The Determined Weaver''' =

Re(Cr)An 5

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Part

Like ''The Weaver's Subtle Art'' (below), this spell makes a lasting change to a tapestry or other item made from cloth (whether made from wool, cotton, silk, or linen).

Any geometric shape or regular line in or on the item, or even the shape of the item itself, can be made even and precise. The Creo requisite ensures that the lines and shapes affected by this spell are perfect examples of their type.

This spell is used to enhance items, especially when making Excellent-quality wares, or Items of Quality as per the Verditius House Mystery detailed in ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'', page 124.

The application of this spell alone is not enough to raise the true quality of an item (it cannot be made more hardy or more richly colored, for instance), but it is enough to aid spells that require certain mathematical resonances.

The individual changes made by the spell may stand out and draw the eye of those interested in the piece. Those looking at the work should make a Perception + Awareness + simple die roll against an Ease Factor of 9. On a success they notice the precision of the affected areas. Those who have the ability may substitute their Weaver craft ability for Awareness when making the check.

A Herbam casting requisite is required for tapestries that include plant-based cloth or yarn.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +1 Part, +1 for size, +1 for Creo requisite)

<span id="the-treacherous-cloak"></span>
==== '''The Treacherous Cloak''' ====

ReAn 5

R: Sight, D: Conc, T: Ind

This spell uses a target's clothes against him, twisting them into cords that then strangle the target for as long as the caster keeps concentrating.

Using the deprivation rules in '''ArM5''', page 180, the target must make a Stamina check every 5 rounds. Additionally, the target can attempt a Strength + Athletics stress roll against the caster's Dexterity + Finesse Simple roll in order to break the grip of the clothes. If the character is being helped, use the highest Strength + Athletics score and add 1 for each other person helping.

The target can attempt a Brave Personality Trait roll against an Ease Factor of 9 in order to perform an action other than attempting to free himself from the grip of his own clothes.

The caster must, as usual, succeed in Concentration rolls each round.

(base 1, +3 Sight, +1 Concentration)

<span id="the-weavers-subtle-art"></span>
==== '''The Weaver's Subtle Art''' ====

ReAn 5

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Part

This spell allows the caster to make minor alterations to a finished tapestry or embroidered item, such as changing a subject's pose, improving a likeness, or rewording an embroidered phrase. The change is minor in relation to the whole, never making up more than a fraction of the item, but as this spell can act on large tapestries, the individual change may itself be quite large. The change retains the original character of the work, so the intrinsic workmanship cannot, in itself, be improved through this spell.

The version known to Petalichus was handed down through generations of his confraternity. Casters who know this version may use their Weaver craft ability in place of Finesse when determining the quality of the effect. Magi who invent this spell, or learn it from another source, use Finesse as normal.

A Herbam casting requisite is required for tapestries using plant-based thread.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +1 Part, +1 for size, +1 for Finesse)

<span id="corpus-spells-6"></span>
=== ''Corpus Spells'' ===

<span id="arachnes-tuition"></span>
==== '''Arachne's Tuition''' ====

ReCo 20

R:Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

Cast by a master on his apprentice, this spell allows the master to control the apprentice's movements for a day.

The caster can suspend the spell, allowing the apprentice to continue with a task or exercise, and then resume control in order to help the apprentice through a particularly complex task or to correct his student and show how something should be done. The apprentice learns at a much deeper level by having his own actions controlled from within, rather than simply being guided from without.

This spell is designed to assist with the training of physical skills, notably craft skills. Each season a master uses this spell to instruct an apprentice, he can add 1 to his Training Source Quality (see '''ArM5''', page 164).

This version was developed generations ago within Petallichus' line of Verditius weavers, though others certainly exist elsewhere within House Verditius and perhaps also in other Houses.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-52"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

Two seasons of using this spell on an apprentice counts as one year of being under a constant magical effect as per '''ArM5''', page 168, and inflicts 1 Warping point in that year.

(Base 4, +1 Eye, +2 Sun, +1 control over fine movements)

<span id="remain-within-those-walls"></span>
=== '''Remain Within Those Walls''' ===

ReCo 20

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Arcane Circle

A variant on a warding theme, this spell cast with an Arcane Circle target both imprisons people within its bounds and prevents them from crossing into the Arcane Circle.

The Arcane Circle target is usable by those who know the Hermetic Geometry Mystery, and allows the caster to draw a circle at his location while calculating and casting against a sympathetically identical circle in a remote location (see ''The Mysteries Revised Edition'', page 95).

Those with Resistance (through Parma or Might) are not confined or restricted unless this spell Penetrates that resistance. Arcane Connections to a named target may be used in order to increase the Penetration as normal, though the increased Penetration is only valid against that named target.

As the base effect for warding spells is Touch, Ring, Circle, the Arcane Circle target raises the level of the spell by one magnitude as it is more complex than its mundane equivalent, but no modifier is required for either Touch or Ring.

(base 15, +1 Arcane Circle)

<span id="imaginem-spells-4"></span>
=== ''Imaginem Spells'' ===

<span id="to-see-as-though-a-plethron-distant"></span>
== '''To See As Though a Plethron Distant''' ==

InIm 25

R: Sight, D: Conc, T: Special

This spell allows the caster to see and hear his surroundings as though he was standing in another place he can naturally see. The spell does not enhance the caster's natural sight or hearing.

The caster has some freedom to move his vantage point, but cannot move into any place that he cannot naturally see from his physical location. Moving the viewpoint requires a Simple Stamina + Concentration Roll vs. Ease Factor 6.

Petalichus and his brother Cononites have investigated this spell, as Petalichus had anticipated that he would be able to use it to gain sight of new viable targets. This proved not to be the case. William Bonisagi theorized that the species, recreated as they are, bear insufficient connection to the things they represent to support casting spells against them. By being so far removed, the magus would essentially be attempting to cast his spells on mere apparitions.

However, using this spell to aid with Hermetic Geometry spells (those using Arcane Line, Arcane Circle, and Arcane Ring) reduces the Distance Level by 1 if the caster can now see his target. This is cumulative with other spells or devices that may also reduce the Distance Level (see ''The Worldly Halysis'' later).

The Target is based on Room, but is more complex as it allows unbounded spaces to be targeted. Any area comparable to Room can be targeted.

(Base 2, +3 Sight, +1 Concentration, +3 Special target based on Room +1)

<span id="mentem-spells-4"></span>
=== ''Mentem Spells'' ===

<span id="the-unwelcoming-room"></span>
==== '''The Unwelcoming Room''' ====

CrMe 30

R: Line, D: Conc, T: Room

Targeted on a distant room using the Arcane Line Range, this spell induces anger in all affected targets. A stress roll using an appropriate Personality Trait (like Calm or Restrained) against an Ease Factor of 9 is required to keep the anger under control. Aggressive traits (like Argumentative, Intolerant, or Angry) work against the roll. A failure inclines the target to aggressive action against anyone or anything that could appear or feel threatening.

Petalichus knows the effect The Gift has on mundanes, and recognizes that the fear and distrust it fosters in them can easily be triggered into something more dangerous. Petalichus uses this spell to heighten tensions and use them against his enemies from a position of safety.

(Base 4, +3 Line, +1 Concentration, +2 Room)

<span id="vim-spells-2"></span>
=== ''Vim Spells'' ===

<span id="a-days-grace"></span>
=== '''A Day's Grace''' ===

ReVi 30

R: Touch D: Hours T: Individual

Using this spell, the caster is able to suppress one other spell he casts at the same time as this spell for a Duration counted in Celestial Hours (see ''The Mysteries Revised Edition'', page 49).

The suppressed spell can have a level up to 25 and may be Spontaneous, Ceremonial or Formulaic. Ritual spells are too complex to be suppressed by this spell although should a version of this spell be designed as a Ritual that should be possible.

Spells with Circle and/or Ring Duration (including Arcane Circle and Arcane Ring) are also suppressed but fail if the circle inscribed during casting is broken before the spell is released (Arcane Circles and Rings are still visible to those with Second Sight, and may be broken by them before the spell is released).

Sight-Ranged spells must be targeted

during the initial casting. Once the spell has been cast, the target will still be affected by it whether or not that target is still visible to the caster or not, though only where that target remains in the same location until the

''Magi of Hermes''

spell is triggered.

(base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Hours - equivalent of Sun)

<span id="sample-rotes"></span>
=== ''Sample Rotes'' ===

Petalichus has invented the following effects as Rotes, the simple magical effects available to students of Hermetic Numerology. See ''The Mysteries Revised Edition'', page 92 for details on casting.

<span id="sense-the-weight-of-divine-power"></span>
== '''Sense the Weight of Divine Power''' ==

InVi 3

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This rote (designed using the Hermetic Numerology Mystery Virtue) is a simple effect to tell the caster what strength of Divine aura he is currently standing in.

(Base 2, +1 Touch)

<span id="scribe-the-perfect-circle"></span>
=== '''Scribe the Perfect Circle''' ===

Re(Cr)Te 4

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

As the spell described in ''The Mysteries Revised Edition'', page 96.

<span id="the-unseen-arm"></span>
=== '''The Unseen Arm''' ===

ReTe 5

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind As the spell listed in '''ArM5''', page 155.

<span id="recollection-of-memories-never-quite-lived"></span>
==== '''Recollection of Memories Never Quite Lived''' ====

MuMe 4

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind As the spell listed in '''ArM5''', page 149.

<span id="enchanted-items-9"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Petalichus created the following items.

<span id="items-of-quality"></span>
=== ''Items of Quality'' ===

Many of the items Petalichus made for both his mundane and his Hermetic customers were Items of Quality (see ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'', page 124) that he was able to create after being initiated into the deeper Mysteries of his House. Those listed below are just a sample.

<span id="battle-standard"></span>
==== '''Battle Standard''' ====

This standard was crafted for a wealthy Byzantine noble and grants a +2 bonus to Leadership when used on the battlefield. Interestingly, while the standard has been designed for the specific noble, if the standard is ever captured in battle, the capturing side benefits from the Leadership bonus.

<span id="cloth-shears"></span>
==== '''Cloth Shears''' ====

Petalichus brought the inherent quality of these fine steel shears out to assist him with his more mundane work. The shears grant a +2 bonus to rolls to create or mend clothing. But he took the process further and enchanted the shears with Rego Craft Magic (see below) and found that the quality also aided the spell. The shears grant the same bonus to Finesse rolls (when making or mending clothes) called for when using the enchantment (see below).

<span id="cuirass-of-steel"></span>
==== '''Cuirass of Steel''' ====

Despite its name, this cuirass is leather, not steel. Petalichus brought out the natural protective quality of armor to give this elegant embossed leather cuirass a +4 Soak bonus (the maximum Petalichus could achieve at that time). The armor retained its relative lightness while becoming as hard as steel. He granted the cuirass to his shield grog, Adrastos, in return for his long service and loyalty. This partial leather scale gives protection of 7 and a load of 3.

<span id="loom"></span>
==== '''Loom''' ====

Petalichus has brought out his loom's intrinsic quality to work cloth. As a loom has a very specialized use, it benefits from a +4 shape and material bonus to weave cloth (Petalichus could instead have brought out a +2 shape and material bonus with Imaginem). This bonus applies to all mundane weaving work done on the loom. He also spent a season investing the loom with the ''Day's Worth of Weaving'' spell effect (see above) with two uses per day. The Finesse rolls required by this effect also benefit from the +4 bonus.

<span id="the-cloak-of-authority"></span>
=== ''The Cloak of Authority'' ===

ReMe 24 R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind Pen +0, 12/day

This exquisite ceremonial cloak, embroidered with majestic and astrological iconography, was designed for a mundane noble who, in the way of Byzantine politics, was uncertain of the loyalty of those around him. The cloak is invested with ''The Aura of Rightful Authority'' ('''ArM5''', page 151) with 12 uses per

<span id="magi-of-hermes-53"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

day. The jeweled clasp at the cloak's throat forms the focus for the Eye contact Range, and the device is activated through stroking this clasp.

This cloak brought Petalichus to the attention of the Tribunal. His handiwork was recognized and charges of interfering with mundanes were brought against him for giving such a device to a man known to have lofty ambitions. Petalichus defeated the charge by producing his Lab Text for the device and proving that he had imbued no Penetration, thereby ensuring that the Divinely ordained natural order (''Realms of Power: The Divine'', page 42) could not be upset.

(base5, +1 Eye, +2 Sun; +4 12/day)

<span id="sanctum-door-hanging"></span>
=== ''Sanctum Door Hanging'' ===

This tapestry, which is large enough to hang in front of a sizable door, bears a stark white sanctum marker against a deep red background. From a distance it appears plain, though threaded through with various shades. A closer look reveals unnerving images of damnation and death that loom out of the tapestry.

The purpose of the tapestry is to protect whatever room Petalichus happens to be using as a temporary sanctum. He often has cause to travel, and ensures that he takes this device with him to warn curious servants and innkeepers away from the secrets of wizards.

The sanctum marker design is for the benefit of magi, as Petalichus doubts the Penetration built into the device's effects will stop a committed magus of any worth.

<span id="come-no-further"></span>
==== '''Come No Further''' ====

CrMe 45 Pen +12, Constant Effect Expires: 70 Years R: Sight, D: Sun, T: Room

This constant effect causes all those who pass in front of or approach the tapestry to feel distinctly uneasy in its presence. Those affected by the spell must succeed in a Brave (or other appropriate) personality trait stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9 in order to touch the tapestry. The effect has a Penetration of +12, sufficient perhaps to warn off apprentices or inexperienced magi.

(Effect: base 4, +3 Sight, +2 Sun, +2 Room; Modifications: +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger, +6 penetration)

<span id="the-weight-of-all-perdition-be-upon-you"></span>
= '''The Weight of All Perdition Be Upon You''' =

Cr(Pe)Me(Co) 35 R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind Pen +20, Unlimited use Expires: 70 Years

On touching the tapestry, the target feels a scalding pain in whatever part of his body came into contact with it. The pain does no damage and fades over the next few seconds, but it feels like a deep burn and the memory lingers.

Alongside the pain, the target hears a thousand demonic voices crying out for his soul inside his mind in some unholy language. The affected target must succeed in a Brave Personality Trait against an Ease Factor of 9 in order to pass the tapestry. If the target has previously been affected by the ''Come No Further'' effect, he receives a –3 penalty to the roll.

(base 4, +1 Touch, +2 requisites; +10 unlimited/day, +10 penetration)

<span id="the-light-of-fell-disease"></span>
=== ''The Light of Fell Disease'' ===

PeCo 30 R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Room Pen: +0

Byzantine politics can be as swift and brutal as any in Venice or Rome, and on more than one occasion Petalichus has resorted to baser measures to dispose of those who might stand in his way. This enchanted candle (created as a charged device with one charge per candle), when lit, unleashes the deadly disease Variola (Small Pox), affecting all in the same room as the candle.

This version of the device has no Penetration, so cannot affect any potential targets with Magic Resistance. And as the Duration is Momentary, the disease is not communicable (however, in their weakened state, victims may become infected with further plagues and these may be passed on to others).

All those affected by the effect must make a Stamina + Living Conditions Modifier + Wound Penalty + stress die roll against an Ease Factor of 9. Failing the roll means the target has contracted the disease.

Each week that the target is attended to by a physician, he makes a Stamina + Medicine + (the worse of the Fatigue or Wound Penalty) + stress die roll against an Ease Factor of 9 to remain stable, or 15 to improve. If the target's condition worsens, he loses a

Long-term Fatigue level that cannot be regained except through medical treatment. An improvement is represented by regaining a Long-term Fatigue Level. If the character goes beyond the Unconscious level, there is nothing more that can be done except to call for a priest.

The candles that carry this effect are easily spotted by those who know what to look for. They bear small inscriptions that spiral up the shaft of the candle that may be recognized as having Perdo Corpus resonances, but to the untrained eye they may simply look more elaborate than is necessary for a simple candle.

Quaesitor Valeria of the covenant of Donum Chanuti uncovered evidence that Petalichus had used such a device in the murder of Thomas Roxbury, a notary in the employ of House Guernicus, when his pursuit of Solar Magnus led him to Canterbury.

(base 20 +1 Touch, +2 Room)

<span id="dreams-you-shall-not-wake-from"></span>
=== ''Dreams You Shall Not Wake From'' ===

CrIg 48 R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Room Pen: +30, 1 charge

This charged device, each charge in the form of a single bedsheet, is triggered through a target laying upon it. It contains a powerful Creo Ignem effect that creates a raging magical fire that starts at the sheet and instantly spreads to take in everything in the room (the extent of the magical target). The fire may spread beyond the room as the heat and flames burn naturally once the magical impetus finishes.

In the round the device is triggered, all targets within the room take +20 damage from the intense searing fire. This is a magical attack and can be resisted. Until the fire is put out or the target(s) leave the area, they continue to take +10 damage each round from natural fire. Storyguides may want to consider further effects on the target building after such an explosive blaze. The impact table in '''ArM5''', page 181, may help.

Through subterfuge, Petalichus successfully deployed this device in his infamous defeat of Solar Magnus in Canterbury. He had learned of his enemy's cyclic magic and knew when his magic resistance would be at its weakest.

(base 15 +1 Touch, +2 Room; +15 penetration, +3 environmental trigger)

<span id="the-map-of-many-places"></span>
=== ''The Map of Many Places'' ===

In(Re)Im(An) 25 R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Vision Pen: +0, 1/Day

This device is a woven cloth map that has the ability to re-weave itself, redrawing the map to fit with its current location. It works by taking the image of the immediate area, as though from 100 paces straight up, and then re-weaving the threads in the map to match what it has seen.

The effect is refined enough to pick out any constraining city walls and, if cast within those walls, will only map that area. The map is not accurate enough to represent smaller streets and alleys, or pick out individual buildings unless they are sizable, such as churches.

If used with Hermetic Geometry Arcane Line, Circle, and Ring spells, the map reduces the Distance Level by 1 (see ''The Mysteries Revised Edition'', page 95). This is cumulative with other tools.

(base 1, +3 Sight Range, +4 Sight Target, +1 complexity)

<span id="the-convenient-door"></span>
=== ''The Convenient Door'' ===

ReTe(He) 25 R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Structure Pen: +0, 1/Day

The small cloth chalk bag hanging on Petalichus' belt is another of his enchantments. By using the chalk from the bag to draw an outline on a wall, the magi triggers an effect that opens up a hole in that wall or structure by moving the Terram or Herbem components of the wall aside. The result is a direct line of sight between the caster and open air or to some substance that is not part of the structure.

Minor obstacles such as chairs, tables, or other furniture do not obstruct the effect. The effect is strong enough to affect stone and glass but not metal. The size of the holes created by the effect are determined by the size of the chalk outline, but they cannot be made larger than is necessary for the caster to step comfortably through.

The Structure Target allows the effect to force holes through several walls in the same casting. This effect works no matter which surface the outline is drawn on — whether a wall, a ceiling, or a floor (though of course lead roofs cause this spell to fail at the last).

The chalk in the bag is non-magical and is incidental, being used simply to activate the effect. The effect itself is generated by the bag, which is decorated with images of doors on each of its four panels.

(base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Diameter, +3 Structure, +1 Herbam requisite, +1 affect stone)

<span id="greater-numerologists-book"></span>
=== ''Greater Numerologist's Book'' ===

This heavy book brings together copies of ''De Astrologia'' (a work on astrology containing the Chaldean Observations), ''Parapegma'' (forecasts of the risings and settings of the stars), and ''Pros Thrasydaion'' (a mathematical work concerning conics and circles and their intersections). This unique collection of works, kept alive by the Cononites, serves as a focus for both Numerological and Astrological spell casting.

Petalichus has enchanted several copies of this volume, including his own, with ''Sense the Hour'' as per ''The Mysteries Revised Edition'', page 51. In addition, his own volume contains the following enchantments:

<span id="the-worldly-halysis"></span>
==== '''The Worldly Halysis''' ====

InTe 10 R: Arc, D: Mom, T: Ind Pen: +0, 3/Day

This effect informs the caster of the exact distance, expressed in paces, from his current location to the location described by the Arcane Connection.

This effect combines well with other spells using the Arcane Line Range, Arcane Circle Target and Arcane Ring Duration (all granted by the Hermetic Geometry Mystery Virtue) as it reduces the time the caster needs to spend calculating the distance between the caster and the target. Using this effect reduces the Distance Level (see ''The Mysteries Revised Edition'', page 95) between the caster and his target by 3. So a target at Distance Level 8 (180 – 225 paces) can be targeted as though he were at Distance Level 5 (75 – 105 paces).

<span id="although-the-effect-provides-an-accurate-number-of-paces-between-caster-and-target-this-number-must-still-be-included-in-the-casters-calculations-for-remote-spell-casting-hence-the-reduction-in-the-distance-level-rather-than-an-outright-negation-of-it"></span>
==== Although the effect provides an accurate number of paces between caster and target, this number must still be included in the caster's calculations for remote spell-casting, hence the reduction in the Distance Level rather than an outright negation of it. ====

The effect is named for the Halysis, an ancient Greek measuring chain used by mathematicians and engineers to ensure measurements were constant and correct.

(base 2, +4 Arcane Connection; +2 3/day)

<span id="the-bodily-halysis"></span>
=== '''The Bodily Halysis''' ===

InCo 32

R: Arcane Connection D: Momentary T: Individual

Pen: +30, 3/Day

As T''he Worldly Halysis'' except that this effect operates through the form of Corpus and informs the caster of the exact number of paces between the caster and the target described by the Arcane Connection.

(base 3, +4 Arcane Connection; +2 3/ day, +15 penetration)

<span id="talisman-distaff-of-petalichus"></span>
= ''Talisman: Distaff of Petalichus'' =

Petalichus took a greatstaff in the shape of a distaff as his talisman, to represent his heritage. But the staff is full of mathematical resonances, from being carved and shaped with four sides rather than rounded smooth, to the complex ratios between the positioning of symbols and inscriptions up its shaft. These symbols are picked out in white against the deep black polish of the staff.

<span id="attunements-3"></span>
==== '''Attunements''' ====

+4 control things at a distance (staff) +4 destroy things at a distance (staff)

<span id="the-invisible-eye-revealed-variant"></span>
==== '''The Invisible Eye Revealed (variant)''' ====

InVi 29 R: Per, D: Sun, T: Touch Pen: +0, Constant Effect

As Petalichus enchanted this effect into his talisman, he feels the effect of the spell each time he takes up or carries his staff.

(base 15, +2 Sun; +4 constant effect)

<span id="the-gaze-of-others"></span>
=== '''The Gaze of Others''' ===

CrIg 17 R: Per, D: Conc, T: Ind, Pen: +0, 50/day

Triggered by ''The Invisible Eye Revealed'' also installed in the talisman.

When ''The Invisible Eye Revealed'' effect detects a scrying attempt, several of the white inscriptions on the staff glow with a soft light. The effect is subtle and barely noticeable in daylight, but Petalichus is a suspicious man and always keeps a watchful eye on his talisman when he doesn't have it in his hand.

(base 2, +1 Concentration; +6 levels 50/day, +5 item maintains concentration, +3 triggered effect)

<span id="chapter-twelve"></span>
=== Chapter Twelve ===

<span id="ranulf-of-flambeau"></span>
= Ranulf of Flambeau =

Concept: This magus aims to master fire magic, developing a wide range of new spells and effects, including non-violent applications of this Art.

Ranulf of Flambeau was born to a family of candle makers. He could possibly have had a successful life taking up his family's trade, even considering the drawbacks of his poor vision and the deleterious social effects of The Gift. Instead, he was apprenticed into House Flambeau. Ranulf's parens passed into a Twilight episode while Ranulf was taking his Gauntlet. Ranulf assumed the title of Hermetic magus after a period of months, with the approval of two other Flambeau magi who had witnessed his successful performance in meeting the challenges set for his Gauntlet. Three years later Ranulf's parens recovered from her Twilight and demanded that Ranulf repeat his Gauntlet to her satisfaction. Ranulf felt this request to be a slight on his honor. Ranulf's parens felt that Ranulf's refusal to repeat the Gauntlet was a slight to her own honor. The two were never reconciled.

Ranulf strives to become a great master of the Arts of Ignem and Vim. As an apprentice, he was obsessed with the spell ''Pilum of Fire'' and dreamed of becoming a respected and feared hoplite. As he aged, he became less aggressive and particularly interested in nonviolent applications of the Art of Ignem.

<span id="banulf-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== Banulf at Gauntlet ===

Characteristics: Int +2, Per -2, Pre +1, Com +0, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

Size: 0 Age: 24 (24) Decrepitude: 0 Warping Score: 0 (0) Confidence Score: 1 (3)

Virtues and Flaws: The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (Unnatural Fires); Affinity (Ignem), Mastered Spells, Method Caster, Puissant Ignem*, Puissant Magic Theory, Puissant Penetration; Deficient Technique (Intellego), Tormenting Master; Deleterious Circumstances (casting spells with Range Sight or Eye), Poor Eyesight

\* House Virtue

Personality Traits: Inquisitive +2, Sensitive to Insult +2, Belligerent +1, Brave+1, Loquacious –1

Reputations: Did not pass gauntlet +3 (Flambeau)

Combat:

Fist: Init +1, Attack +4, Defense +4, Damage +1

Dodge: Init +1, Attack n/a, Defense +5, Damage n/a

Soak: +2

Fatigue Levels: OK, 0, -1, -3, -5, Unconscious

Wound Penalties: -1 (1-5), -3 (6-10), -5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

Abilities: Artes Liberales 1 (Ceremonial Casting), Athletics 2 (running), Awareness 1 (searching), Brawl 3 (dodge), Carouse 2 (staying sober), Guile 1 (lying to strangers), Concentration 1 (spells), Dead Language: Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Living Language: Castillian 5 (candles), Magic Theory 4+2 (inventing spells), Organization Lore: Order of Hermes 1 (personalities), Parma Magica 1 (Corpus), Penetration 2+2 (Ignem), Profession: Candle Maker 2 (speed), Stealth 2 (hide)

Arts: Cr 5, In 0, Mu 5, Pe 4, Re 4; An 0, Aq 0, Au 0, Co 0, He 0, Ig 10+3 (4), Im 0, Me 0, Te 0, Vi 6

Twilight Scars: none Encumbrance: 0 (0)

Spells Known:

Coat of Prometheus (Crlg 5/+20) Flash of the Scarlet Flames (Crlg 15/+20)

Fasting Hearth (Crlg 20/+25 F)

Pilum of Fire (CrIg <math display="inline">20/+29^{-F-M}</math> ), Mastery 4 (Fast Casting, Defense, Multi Casting,

Penetration)

Tales of the Ashes (InIg 5/+6 D)

Enduring Flame (MuIg 10/+25 F) Boreal Flames (Mu(Pe)Ig 15/+25 F)

The Patient Spell (ReVi 20/+12)

Scales of the Magical Weight (InVi <math display="inline">5/+4^{D}</math> ) Sense the Nature of Vis (InVi <math display="inline">5/+4^{D}</math> )

F includes Magical Focus

M includes Spell Mastery

D includes Deficient Technique

Vis: none

Appearance: Ranulf's eyes are held in a nearperpetual squint as he closely examines the world with his inadequate sight. His face is reddened and the short hair around his face is bleached from long exposure to hot fires at close range. He is of ordinary stature and build, and he prefers to wear several layers of wool and leather clothing to insulate himself from the often-extreme temperatures of his environment.

Casting Sigil: Ranulf's casting sigil is brightness. The colors of objects affected by his spells lighten, and fires created by his magic burn with exceptional brightness.

Voting Sigil: Ranulf's voting sigil is an evillooking dagger, but as Ranulf ages he feels less and less comfortable with this overtly violent sigil, eventually becoming rather embarrassed by its belligerent appearance.

<span id="ranulf-15-years"></span>
=== Ranulf +15 years ===

Characteristics: Int +2, Per -2, Pre +1, Com +0, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

Size: 0

Age: 39 (37) Decrepitude: 0

Warping Score: 1 (0) Confidence Score: 1 (3)

Virtues and Flaws: The Cift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (Unnatural Fires); Affinity (Ignem), Mastered Spells, Method Caster, Puissant Ignem*, Puissant Magic Theory, Puissant Penetration; Deficient Technique

(Intellego), Tormenting Master; Deleterious Circumstances (spells of Range Sight or Eye), Miles (Houses of Hermes: Societates p 31), Poor Evesight

House Virtue

Personality Traits: Inquisitive +2, Sensitive to Insult +2, Brave+1, Loquacious -1

Reputations: Did not pass gauntlet +3 (Flambeau), Aspiring Hoplite +2 (Quaesitors) Combat:

Fist: Init +1, Attack +4, Defense +4, Damage +1

Dodge: Init +1, Attack n/a, Defense +5, Damage n/a

Soak: +2

Fatigue Levels: OK, 0, -1, -3, -5, Unconscious

Wound Penalties: -1 (1-5), -3 (6-10), -5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

Abilities: Artes Liberales 1 (Ceremonial Casting), Athletics 2 (running), Awareness 1 (searching), Brawl 3 (dodge), Carouse 1 (staying sober), Guile 1 (lying to strangers), Code of Hermes 1 (Wizard's Marches), Concentration 3 (spells), Dead Language: Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Finesse 2 (Ignem), Living Language: Castillian 5 (candles), Magic Theory 6+2 (inventing spells), Organization Lore: Order of Hermes 1 (personalities), Parma Magica 3 (Corpus), Penetration 4+2 (5) (Ignem), Philosophiae 2 (ritual magic), Profession: Candle Maker 2 (speed), Stealth 2 (hide)

Arts: Cr 11, In 3, Mu 7, Pe 4, Re 8; An 0, Aq 0, Au 0, Co 0, He 5, Ig 14+3 (1), Im 0, Me 0, Te 0, Vi 9

Twilight Scars: none Encumbrance: 0 (0)

Coat of Prometheus (CrIg 5/+30)

Flash of the Scarlet Flames (CrIg 15/+30)

Mien of Helios (Crlg 15/+30)

Fasting Hearth (CrIg 20/+41 F)

Pilum of Fire (CrIg 20/+45 F M), Mastery 4 (Fast Casting, Defense, Multi Casting, Penetration)

Stockade of Infernos (CrIg 40/+41 F)

Tales of the Ashes (InIg 5/+11 D)

Enduring Flame (Mulg 10/+41 F)

Boreal Flames (Mu Pe)Ig 15/+33 F)

The Patient Spell (ReVi 20/+19)

Scales of the Magical Weight (InVi 5/+7 D)

Sense the Nature of Vis (InVi 5/+7 D) Fincludes Magical Focus

<math display="inline">^{\mathrm{M}}</math> includes Spell Mastery

D includes deficient technique

Vis: Two pawns of Ignem carried as a small pouch of ashes; the ashes become hot to the touch at sunset every day.

Appearance: Ranulf's eyes are held in a near-

<span id="magi-of-hermes-54"></span>
=== Magi of hermes ===

perpetual squint as he closely examines the world with his inadequate sight. His face is reddened and the short hair around his face is bleached from long exposure to hot fires at close range. He is of ordinary stature and build, and he prefers to wear several layers of wool and leather clothing to insulate himself from the often-extreme temperatures of his environment.

Activities in the last 15 years: In his first fifteen years out of Gauntlet, Ranulf concentrated on studying his Abilities and Arts. He spent a good deal of effort fending off political attacks from his former mentor. Ranulf swore to the code of Garus and joined the Milites society both because he believed in their cause and to gain allies against his former mentor. One matter that he was able to see to was the enchantment of his laboratory. Ranulf decided that magical protections against fire were a necessity for studying Ignem in the wooden room that houses his laboratory. Ranulf has spent one season opening his laboratory for enchantment. He spent one season instilling Eyes of the Acolyte, three seasons instilling Facade of Pentecost, and two seasons instilling Laboratory that Has Learned from Experience.

Ranulf expended one season integrating the magical enchantments of his laboratory. Ranulf spent one season inventing Mien of Helios, and three seasons inventing Stockade of Infernos. Ranulf spent two seasons acquiring his longevity ritual from another magus. During this period, Ranulf acquired 180 experience points in Abilities and 160 experience points in Arts (gaining an additional 16 experience points due to his affinity with Ignem).

<span id="ranulf-30-years"></span>
=== Ranulf +30 years ===

Characteristics: Int +2, Per-2, Pre +1, Com +0, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

Size: 0 Age: 54 (38) Decrepitude: 0 Warping Score: 3 (5) Confidence Score: 2 (4)

Virtues and Flaws: The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (Unnatural Fires); Affinity (Ignem), Method Caster, Puissant Ignem*, Puissant Magic Theory, Puissant Penetration; Deficient Technique (Intellego), Tormenting Master; Deleterious Circumstances (spells

of Range Sight or Eye), Miles (Houses of Hermes: Societates p 31), Poor Eyesight House Virtue

Personality Traits: Inquisitive +2, Sensitive to Insult +1, Brave+2, Loquacious –1

Reputations: In feud with Parens +3 (tribunal), Did not pass gauntlet +1 (Flambeau), Hoplite +1 (Quaesitors)

Combat:

Fist: Init +1, Attack +4, Defense +4, Damage +1

Dodge: Init +1, Attack n/a, Defense +5, Damage n/a

Soak: +2

Fatigue Levels: OK, 0, -1, -3, -5, Unconscious

Wound Penalties: -1 (1-5), -3 (6-10), -5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

Abilities: Artes Liberales 2 (Ceremonial Casting), Athletics 2 (running), Awareness 1 (searching), Brawl 3 (dodge), Carouse 1 (staying sober), Guile 1 (lying to strangers), Code of Hermes 1 (Wizard's marches), Concentration 4 (spells), Dead Language: Latin 5 (Hermetic usage), Finesse 3 (Ignem), Living Language: Castillian 5 (candles), Magic Theory 7+2 (5) (inventing spells), Organization Lore: Order of Hermes 1 (personalities), Parma Magica 4 (Corpus), Penetration 4+2 (5) (Ignem), Philosophiae 2 (ritual magic), Profession: Candle Maker 2 (speed), Stealth 2 (hide)

Arts: Cr 13 (6), In 8, Mu 9, Pe 4, Re 8, An 0, Aq 1, Au 2 (1), Co 4, He 7, Ig 18+3, Im 0, Me 5, Te 6, Vi 11

Twilight Scars: none

Equipment: Staff of Ranulf talisman

Encumbrance: 0 (0)

Coat of Prometheus (CrIg 5/+34)

Flash of the Scarlet Flames (CrIg 15/+34)

Mien of Helios (CrIg 15/+34)

Fasting Hearth (Crlg 20/+53 F A)

Pilum of Fire (Crlg 20/+57 F M A), Mastery 4 (Fast Casting, Defense, Multi Casting, Penetration)

Stockade of Infernos (CrIg 40/+53 F A)

Tales of the Ashes (InIg <math display="inline">5/+18^{D\ A}</math> )

Enduring Flame (MuIg <math display="inline">10/+47^{FA}</math> )

Boreal Flames (Mu(Pe)Ig 15/+37 F A) Ward against Heat and flames (ReIg 25/+37 A)

The Patient Spell (ReVi 20/+21)

Scales of the Magical Weight (InVi <math display="inline">5/+12^{DA}</math> )

Sense the Nature of Vis (InVi 5/+12 D A)

Wizard's Boost Ignem (MuVi 30/+22)

Gather Essence of the Beast (ReVi 15/+21)

F includes Magical Focus

M includes Spell Mastery

D includes deficient technique

A includes attunement of talisman

<span id="magi-of-hermes-55"></span>
=== Magi of hermes ===

Vis: Five pawns Creo as seeds stored in the pouch around his neck (these seeds produce non-vis-containing duplicates of themselves intermittently, averaging one duplicate per month), two pawns Ignem as ashes carried in a pouch on belt (the ashes become hot to the touch at sunset every day).

Appearance: Ranulf's eyes are held in a near-perpetual squint as he closely examines the world with his inadequate sight. His face is reddened and the short hair around his face is bleached from long exposure to hot fires at close range. He is of ordinary stature and build, and he prefers to wear several layers of wool and leather clothing to insulate himself from the often-extreme temperatures of his environment. Ranulf is almost never separated from his talisman — a walkingstick-sized staff quite unsuitable for use as a weapon.

Activities in the last 15 years: At age 54, Ranulf is still greatly interested in the martial magics that characterize his House, but he is also beginning to develop a passion for non-violent uses of Ignem.

Ranulf has spent one season learning Ward Against Heat and Flames and one season inventing Wizard's Boost Ignem with the assistance of laboratory notes. He spent one season inventing Gather Essence of the Beast. Ranulf spent one season opening for enchantment the staff that was to become his talisman, one season attuning the staff as his talisman, two seasons instilling Topiary of Flames, three seasons instilling Flames of Stone, one season instilling Surfeit of Fuel, and one season instilling Shadow of Spring Times Departed. Ranulf gained 130 experience points in Abilities and 230 experience points in Arts (receiving an additional 22 experience points from his affinity with Ignem).

<span id="banulf-45-years"></span>
=== Banulf +45 years ===

Characteristics: Int +2, Per -2, Pre +1, Com +0, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

Size: 0

Age: 69 (40)

Decrepitude: 0

Warping Score: 4 (15)

Confidence Score: 2 (4)

Virtues and Flaws: The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus (Unnatural Fires); Affinity (Ignem), Mastered Spells, Method Caster, Puissant Ignem*, Puissant Magic Theory, Puissant Penetra-

tion; Deficient Technique (Intellego), Tormenting Master; Deleterious Circumstances (spells of Range Sight or Eye), Miles (Houses of Hermes: Societates p 31), Poor Eyesight

\* House Virtue

Personality Traits: Inquisitive +2, Sensitive to Insult +1, Brave+2, Loquacious –1

Reputations: In feud with Parens +3 (tribunal), Did not pass gauntlet +1 (Flambeau), Hoplite +1 (Order)

Combat:

Fist: Init +1, Attack +4, Defense +4, Damage +1

Dodge: Init +1, Attack n/a, Defense +5, Damage n/a

Soak: +2

Fatigue Levels: OK, 0, -1, -3, -5, Unconscious

Wound Penalties: -1 (1-5), -3 (6-10), -5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

Abilities: Artes Liberales 2 (Ceremonial Casting), Athletics 2 (running), Awareness 1 (searching), Brawl 3 (dodge), Carouse 1 (staying sober), Guile 1 (lying to strangers), Code of Hermes 2 (Wizard's marches), Concentration 4 (spells), Dead Language: Latin 5 (Hermetic usage), Finesse 3 (Ignem), Living Language: Castillian 5 (candles), Magic Theory 8+2 (inventing spells), Organization Lore: Order of Hermes 1 (personalities), Parma Magica 5 (Corpus), Penetration 4+2 (5) (Ignem), Philosophiae 2 (ritual magic), Profession: Candle Maker 2 (speed), Stealth 2 (hide), Teaching 2 (apprentices)

Arts: Cr 13 (6), In 9, Mu 11, Pe 8, Re 9; An 5, Aq 5, Au 5, Co 5, He 10, Ig 21+3 (6), Im 5, Me 5, Te 6, Vi 16 (3)

'''Twilight Scars''': Fires in the near vicinity of Ranulf move directly away from him as if a slight breeze were coming from him. Smoke is not affected by this.

'''Equipment:''' Staff of Ranulf talisman, Ribbon of Arcane Preservation

Encumbrance: 0 (0)

Coat of Prometheus (CrIg 5/+39)

Flash of the Scarlet Flames (CrIg 15/+39)

Mien of Helios (Crlg 15/+39)

Fasting Hearth (Crlg 20/+58 F A)

Pilum of Fire (Crlg 20/+62 F M A), Mastery 4 (Fast Casting, Defense, Multi Casting, Penetration)

Stockade of Infernos (CrIg 40/+58 F)

Conflagrative Servant (Cr (Mu,Re) Ig 40/+50 AF)

Tales of the Ashes (InIg 5/+20 D A)

Enduring Flame (Mulg 10/+54 F A)

Boreal Flames (Mu(Pe)Ig 15/+48 F)

Petite Phoenix (Mu(Re) Ig 30/+50 F A)

Discriminating Flames (Re Ig 25/+50 F A)

Ward against Heat and flames (ReIg 25/+42 A) Scales of the Magical Weight (InVi 5/+15 D A) Sense the Nature of Vis (InVi <math display="inline">5/+15^{DA}</math> ) Wizard's Expansion Ignem (MuVi 25/+29) Group Wizard's Boost Ignem (MuVi 30/+29) Wizard's Boost Ignem (MuVi 30/+29) Wizard's Communion (MuVi 30/+29) Wizard's Reach Ignem (MuVi 30/+29) Maintain the Demanding Spell (ReVi 30/+27) The Patient Spell (ReVi 20/+27) Gather Essence of the Beast (ReVi 15/+27) includes Magical Focus M includes Spell Mastery

D includes deficient technique

A includes attunement of talisman Vis: Six pawns Vim transferred into a ring worn on right hand, three pawns Ignem as ashes carried in a pouch on belt (the ashes become hot to the touch at sunset every day), two pawns Creo as seeds stored in pouch around neck (these seeds produce non-vis-containing duplicates of themselves intermittently, averaging one duplicate per month), two pawns Muto as cocoons that slowly and continuously change color over the course of minutes.

Appearance: Ranulf's eyes are held in a nearperpetual squint as he closely examines the world with his inadequate sight. His face is reddened and the short hair around his face is bleached from long exposure to hot fires at close range. He is of ordinary stature and build, and he prefers to wear several layers of wool and leather clothing to insulate himself from the often extreme temperatures of his environment. Ranulf is almost never separated from his talisman — a walkingstick-sized staff quite unsuitable for use as a weapon.

Activities in the last 15 years: By age 69, he has other interests and responsibilities that are important to him yet, ironically, his magical power has become respected enough that he is on occasion entreated to take the responsibilities as a hoplite that he so desired in his younger days. Although his mentor no longer claims that Ranulf is not a magus, their adversarial relationship continues to plague them both. Ranulf has spent one season enchanting the Ribbon of Arcane Preservation with the help of laboratory notes. Ranulf expended one season learning Maintain the Demanding Spell, one season learning Wizard's Reach and one season learning Wizard's Communion, with the help of laboratory notes. Ranulf has spent one season

<span id="magi-of-hermes-56"></span>
=== Magi of hermes ===

inventing The Petite Phoenix, one season inventing Discriminating Flames, two seasons inventing Conflagrative Servant, and two seasons inventing Wizard's Expansion. Ranulf also spent one season opening up his talisman to receive further enchantments. Ranulf has acquired 80 experience points in Abilities and 240 experience points in Arts during this period (with an additional 22 Art experience points received due to his affinity with Ignem).

<span id="ranulf-60-years"></span>
=== Ranulf +60 years ===

Characteristics: Int +2, Per -2, Pre +1, Com +0, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

Size: 0 Age: 84 (45) Decrepitude: 0 Warping Score: 5 (20) Confidence Score: 2 (6)

Virtues and Flaws: The Gift, Hermetic Magus ; Major Magical Focus (Unnatural Fires); Affinity (Ignem), Mastered Spells, Method Caster, Puissant Ignem*, Puissant Magic Theory, Puissant Penetration; Deficient Technique (Intellego), Tormenting Master, Deleterious Circumstances (spells of Range Sight or Eye), Miles (Houses of Hermes: Societates p 31), Poor Eyesight

House Virtue

Personality Traits: Inquisitive +2, Brave +2, Loquacious -1

Reputations: Hoplite +1 (Order), Deficient in Intellego (Flambeau) +1

Combat:

Fist: Init +1, Attack +4, Defense +4, Damage +1

Dodge: Init +1, Attack n/a, Defense +5, Damage n/a

Soak: +2

Fatigue Levels: OK, 0, -1, -3, -5, Unconscious

Wound Penalties: -1 (1-5), -3 (6-10), -5 (11-15), Incapacitated (16-20), Dead (21+)

Abilities: Artes Liberales 2 (Ceremonial Casting), Athletics 2 (running), Awareness 1 (searching), Brawl 3 (dodge), Carouse 1 (staying sober), Guile 1 (lying to strangers), Code of Hermes 2 (Wizard's marches), Concentration 4 (spells), Dead Language: Latin 5 (Hermetic usage), Finesse 3 (Ignem), Leadership 1 (grogs), Living Language: Castillian 5 (candles), Magic Theory 8+2 (inventing spells), Organization Lore: Order of Hermes 1 (personalities), Parma Magica 6 (Corpus), Pen-

etration 4+2 (5) (Ignem), Philosophiae 2 (ritual magic), Profession: Candle Maker 2 (speed), Stealth 2 (hide), Teaching 2 (apprentices)

Arts: Cr 14, In 10, Mu 12, Pe 10, Re 10; An 5, Aq 5, Au 5, Co 5, He 10, Ig 25+3 (16), Im 5, Me 5, Te 8, Vi 18

Twilight Scars: Fires in the near vicinity of Ranulf move directly away from him as if a slight breeze were coming from him. Smoke is not affected by this.

Equipment: Chest of the Ember Seed, Ribbon of Arcane Preservation, Staff of Ranulf talisman

Encumbrance: 0 (0)

Coat of Prometheus (CrIg 5/+44)

Flash of the Scarlet Flames (CrIg 15/+44)

Mien of Helios (CrIg 15/+44)

Fasting Hearth (CrIg 20/+64 <sup>F A</sup>)

Pilum of Fire (Crlg 20/+68 F M A), Mastery 4 (Fast Casting, Defense, Multi Casting, Penetration)

Self Immolation (Crlg 30/+64 F A)

Stockade of Infernos (CrIg 40/+64 FA)

Conflagrative Servant (Cr (Mu,Re) Ig 40/+56 F A)

Tales of the Ashes (InIg 5/+23 D A)

Enduring Flame (Mulg 10/+60 F A)

Boreal Flames (Mu(Pe)Ig 15/+56 F A)

Petite Phoenix (Mu(Re)Ig 30/+60 F A)

Discriminating Flames (Relg 25/+56 F A)

Ward against Heat and flames (ReIg 25/+46 A)

Ward Against Immolation (ReIg 35/+46 A)

Unified Flame (Relg 35/+56 F A)

Transformation of Fire (MuTe(IgHe) 40/+36 F A)

Scales of the Magical Weight (InVi 5/+16 D A)

Sense the Nature of Vis (InVi <math display="inline">5/+16^{D A}</math> )

Wizard's Expansion Ignem (MuVi 25/+32)

Group Wizard's Boost Ignem (MuVi 30/+32)

Wizard's Boost Ignem (MuVi 30/+32)

Wizard's Communion (MuVi 30/+32)

Wizard's Reach Ignem (MuVi 30/+32)

Wizard's Boost (Vim) (MuVi 35/+32)

Wind of Mundane Silence (PeVi 40/+34 A)

The Patient Stell (ReVi 20/+30)

Maintain the Demandina Stell (ReVi 30/+30)

Opening the Intangible Tunnel (ReVi 40/+30)

<sup>F</sup> includes Magical Focus

M includes Spell Mastery

D includes deficient technique

A includes attunement of talisman

Vis: Eight pawns Vim transferred into a ring worn on his right hand, eight pawns Ignem as ashes carried in a pouch on his belt (the ashes become hot to the touch at sunset every day), four pawns Muto as snakeskins.

Appearance: Ranulf's eyes are held in a nearperpetual squint as he closely examines the world with his inadequate sight. His face is reddened and the short hair

around his face is bleached from long exposure to hot fires at close range. He is of ordinary stature and build, and he prefers to wear several layers of wool and leather clothing to insulate himself from the often extreme temperatures of his environment. Ranulf is almost never separated from his talisman — a walkingstick-sized staff quite unsuitable for use as a weapon.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' During these 15 years, Ranulf took an apprentice. Ranulf's mentor passed into Twilight at a very advanced age and Ranulf presented a fixed Arcane Connection to himself (created by his apprentice) to the castellan of Castra Solis to fill the void left by his mentor's passing (''Houses of Hermes: Societates'', page 13). Ranulf's weakness with Intellego spells was exposed during a certamen challenge at a Flambeau tournament, and many of his housemates know of this weakness. Ranulf has become very interested in the possibilities inherent in using fires that are Arcane Connections

<span id="magi-of-hermes-57"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

to one another, although he has only just begun to develop spells exploring their use. Ranulf spent two seasons investing ''Shriek of the Impending Shafts'' into his talisman, and two seasons investing ''Defense of the Roaring Furnace'' in his talisman. Ranulf spent one season creating the Chest of the Ember Seed. Ranulf spent one season learning ''Wind of Mundane Silence'' and one season learning ''Opening the Intangible Tunnel,'' both with the help of laboratory notes. Ranulf expended one season inventing ''Self Immolation'', two seasons inventing ''Ward against Immolation'', one season inventing ''Unified Flame''s, three seasons inventing ''Wizard's Boost (Vim)'', and three seasons inventing ''Transformation of Fire''. Ranulf has spent one season searching for his apprentice and 14 seasons training his apprentice. Ranulf gained 35 experience points in Abilities and 175 experience points in Arts (with an additional 35 Art experience points received due to his affinity with Ignem).

<span id="pilum-of-fire-and-other-common-spells"></span>
=== ''Pilum of Fire and Other Common Spells'' ===

''Pilum of Fire'' is a popular spell within the Order of Hermes, and it is especially popular with the faction of Flambeau who follow the School of the Founder.

Part of this popularity is due to the rich history of the spell. It was used by many famous magi throughout the Order's history, and some magi take pride in using the same tool as their forebears.

Yet some of the spell's popularity is actually the result of that popularity itself. This is true not only of ''Pilum of Fire'', but of several common spells within the Order of Hermes. Many readable laboratory texts are available for these spells, and there exist several texts concerning mastery of the spells. In addition, other spells have been developed to be used in conjunction with the common spells, such as a ''Wizard's Boost'', ''Maintain the Demanding Spell'', or ''The Patient Spell'' of appropriate level, and special spells relating specifically to commonly used spells. Even if such spells are not common, an enterprising magus may well be able to strike a bargain with the magi and covenants that posses laboratory texts for these spells, and thereby avoid the effort of inventing them from scratch.

An example of a spell specifically tailored to be used with another is ''Boreal Flames''. Certainly a spell to create a jet of icy flames could be developed as a Creo Ignem spell with a Muto requisite, and such a spell could be cast without the Concentration difficulties presented by ''Boreal Flames''. Yet this hypothetical spell would not be able to take advantage of the proficiency that many magi have developed in using ''Pilum of Fire''. A jet of icy flames is useful specifically against targets that are either naturally immune to heat or have become so through protective magics, two sorts of foes that are also likely to have Magic Resistance. Most casters are able to achieve greater penetration with both ''Pilum of Fire'' and ''Boreal Flames'' (both spells need to penetrate) then they would be able to achieve with a single higher-level spell.

While many magi muse that a spell similar to ''Pilum of Fire'' with a longer range or with a less-intense flame that would allow better penetration might be better suited to their particular needs, the resources that exist within the Order that specifically relate to ''Pilum of Fire'' make it the spell used by magi more often than might be warranted by its utility alone.

<span id="new-spells-10"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Ranulf has designed these new spells.

<span id="ignem-spells-4"></span>
=== ''Ignem Spells'' ===

<span id="coat-of-prometheus"></span>
=== '''Coat of Prometheus''' ===

CrIg 5

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind.

This spell enchants a person to remain at least comfortably warm regardless of how cold the environment is. Snow immediately melts off of the target's body, and moisture soon evaporates from both the target and his clothing. The target suffers no ill effects from normal extremes of cold weather. The spell also confers a +5 Soak bonus to resist damage caused by extreme cold, and a –5 Soak penalty to resist damage caused by extreme heat. Ease Factors of rolls to resist the environmental effects of heat are increased by 3 for characters affected by ''Coat of Prometheus''.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, + 2 Sun)

<span id="mien-of-helios"></span>
==== '''Mien of Helios''' ====

CrIg Level 15

R: Per, D: Diam, T: Ind

This spell causes the caster's body and personal effects to shine with the brightness of the sun. Anyone within 10 paces of the caster who looks in the direction of the caster is temporarily blinded, unless he makes a Stamina stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9. People between 10 and 50 paces from the caster suffer a –3 penalty to all attempts to target the caster. The light created by this spell illuminates a great area and, if conditions permit, could be seen from several miles away. Ranulf has noticed that people and creatures whose Magic Resistance is not penetrated by this spell are not illuminated by it, and can be easily identified by their lack of reflected light.

(Base 5, +1 Diameter, +1 exceptionally intense light)

<span id="fasting-hearth"></span>
==== '''Fasting Hearth''' ====

CrIg Level 20

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

This spell creates a fire, which is large enough to fill the hearth in a great hall, at the

location touched by the caster. The created fire burns continuously for the duration of the spell with no need for fuel. This spell was created in the early days of the Order, and is common in covenants without a nearby source of firewood. ''The Fasting Hearth'' is not frequently used for a magus' laboratory because of the Warping effects it can have on research conducted under its influence.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +3 Moon)

<span id="self-immolation"></span>
==== '''Self Immolation''' ====

CrIg 30

R: Personal, D: Diam, T: Ind

The caster enshrouds himself in flames of spectacular intensity. The flames are hot enough to do +30 damage to anything that the caster touches or that touches the caster, and +30 damage per round to both him and anything that he is holding or that he touches. Ranulf casts this spell upon himself only after casting a spell to protect himself from the heat.

(Base 25, +1 Diameter)

<span id="stockade-of-infernos"></span>
==== '''Stockade of Infernos''' ====

CrIg 40

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Group

The caster creates six walls of fire within the range of his spell. Each wall is up to 10 paces long. These walls can be created in any configuration desired by the caster, including configurations where the walls intersect one another. If a particularly precise placement of the walls is desired, the caster should make a Perception + Finesse roll to determine his success. Using ''Stockade of Infernos'' to directly attack a creature by placing a wall of fire across that creature's location may be accomplished using the rules for aimed spells. Anyone passing through one of the walls takes +15 fire damage. Ranulf frequently places his walls as a set of two concentric triangles, or as a narrow path that leaves people trapped within them only a single direction to move.

(Base 15, + 1 Concentration, +2 Group)

<span id="conflagrative-servant"></span>
==== '''Conflagrative Servant''' ====

Cr(Re)Ig 45

R: Voice, D Sun, T Ind

This spell creates a four-pace-tall manshaped mass of brightly burning flames. This mass of flames responds to the verbal commands of the caster. Commands have to be very simple, like &quot;follow me&quot; or &quot;wrap yourself around that creature and hold on.&quot; The conflagrative servant is made of fire hot enough to do +5 damage to things that the servant touches or that touch the servant. The conflagrative servant is insubstantial but cannot pass through solid objects. The insubstantial nature of the servant also normally prevents it from manipulating objects. When created, the conflagrative servant has a Size of +3, Strength and Stamina scores of +5 (although it has no substance to touch things), and Dexterity and Quickness scores of –2. The conflagrative servant has no Abilities. The conflagrative servant is subject to damage from Perdo Ignem spells and water. When the conflagrative servant is injured by these means, it shrinks in size. Every size category that the conflagrative servant shrinks, it loses 2 points from its Strength and Stamina scores and gains 1 point in its Dexterity and Quickness scores. The conflagrative servant is extinguished if it shrinks to smaller than a candle flame in size (Size –10).

Ranulf frequently casts ''Flames of Stone'' upon his conflagrative servants in order to allow them to perform manual labor. This makes the conflagrative servant substantial and vulnerable to physical damage. Any damage done to the conflagrative servant causes it to shrink as detailed above. A Light Wound shrinks the servant one size level, a Medium Wound shrinks the servant two size levels, and so on. Ranulf also frequently uses multiple invocations of ''Discriminating Flames'' on the servants to enable them to use tools and enter structures without causing tremendous damage.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 size, +1 requisite, +1 complexity)

<span id="enduring-flame"></span>
==== '''Enduring Flame''' ====

MuIg Level 10 R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

A fire targeted by this spell is inextinguishable by wind or water for the spell's duration. A fire will still burn out if it runs out of fuel while under the effect of the spell, and a candle that is the target of this spell may still be extinguished by being pinched or snuffed out. This spell was originally designed to keep a candle burning on a windy and rainy night, but it can be used on fires that are much larger in size and can even be used to allow a burning torch to be brought underwater without being extinguished. The bubbles, smoke, and turbulence caused by submerging a fire that is under the effect of this spell prevent it from being a useful method of illuminating aquatic areas.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, + 2 Sun)

<span id="boreal-flames"></span>
==== '''Boreal Flames''' ====

Mu(Pe)Ig 15

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind.

This spell momentarily alters a fire so that rather than radiating heat, it radiates an icy cold. The colors of the target fire change from oranges and yellows to violets and blues. Any fire affected by this spell does cold damage rather than heat damage for the moment of the spell's duration. ''Boreal Flames'' does not function on fires that are so hot that they do more than +15 damage. This spell was specifically designed to alter a casting of ''Pilum of Fire''. ''Boreal Flames'' may be cast in conjunction with another spell; to do so the caster must make an Intelligence + Concentration roll against an Ease Factor of 15 (per '''ArM5,''' page 82). Ranulf uses ''Boreal Flames'' in conjunction with ''The Patient Spell'', as doing so eliminates the need for such a formidable feat of concentration.

(Base 4, + 1 Touch, +2 intensity of flames)

<span id="discourse-of-glowing-tongues"></span>
= '''Discourse of Glowing Tongues''' =

ReIg Level 10

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

This spell controls the sounds created by a fire to make them form words. The alteration is subtle; words are formed of the natural roar, crackles, and hisses of the fire — not with any additional sound. Someone listening at the fire who knows to expect the words can make them out with a Perception + Awareness roll against an Ease Factor of 3. A character who is not aware that the fire is speaking needs to roll against an Ease Factor of 9 on a Perception + Awareness test to realize that the fire is making words at all.

Ranulf and his apprentice (who is also quite talented with the Art of Ignem) use this spell to target fires that are subject to the ''Unified Flame'' spell. Because the ''Unified Flame'' is cast by Ranulf within his covenant, the communication is not impeded by his covenant's ''Aegis of the Hearth''. Neither Ranulf nor his apprentice knows ''Discourse of Glowing Tongues'' as a formulaic spell; instead, they cast it spontaneously when needed. Note that this spell has a Range of Touch and may be difficult or even damaging to cast on a particularly hot fire.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Concentration)

<span id="discriminating-flames"></span>
==== '''Discriminating Flames''' ====

ReIg 25

R: Voice, D:Sun, T: Ind

This spell controls a fire, preventing it from directly heating or burning a particular substance (such as human flesh or the wood of the elm tree) chosen by the caster at the time of casting. The caster must either have a sample of the material to be protected, or must cast the spell with an appropriate casting requisite. Ranulf frequently casts this spell several times upon the same fire in order to make the fire safe for specific environments. The spell only affects the fire that it is cast upon. Other fires, including fires that have been lit from the subject of this spell, are not affected. Fires up to ten times the size of a hearth fire can be targeted with this spell.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 size)

<span id="petite-phoenix"></span>
==== '''Petite Phoenix''' ====

ReIg Level 30 R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

This transmutes a fire into the shape of a small bird. The reshaped fire moves as the will of the caster directs. The fire has a Size of –6, a Dexterity of +3, and a Quickness of +7. The heat of the original blaze is unchanged by this spell. The bird has no more substance than the original fire did and is not subject to most types of attacks, but still may be extinguished with water, Perdo Ignem magics, and similar methods. Being made entirely of flame, the petite phoenix can not pass through solid objects, but objects that are smaller than the bird may pass through it. Ranulf often uses ''Petite Phoenix''

in conjunction with ''Transmutation of Fire'' to move objects such as doors and inconvenient sections of walls. Fires targeted by this spell can be up to ten times the size of a hearth fire.

(Base 10, + 2 Voice, +1 Concentration, +1 size)

<span id="ward-against-immolation"></span>
==== '''Ward Against Immolation''' ====

ReIg 35

R: Per, D: Diam, T: Ind

The caster is rendered immune to heat and fire less than that of the most powerful of Ignem magics. The caster and his possessions receive a +35 bonus to Soak against damage from heat. While this spell is active, Ranulf can (due to the resistance to heat provided by his Ignem Form resistance bonus) tolerate, barely, the heat generated by his ''Self Immolation'' spell. However, ''Ward Against Immolation'', like ''Self Immolation'', is a spell of Duration Diameter. As a result, Ranulf must cast this protective spell prior to casting ''Self Immolation;'' if Ranulf fails to cast ''Ward Against Immolation'' again before the original casting expires, the ''Self Immolation'' spell would cause him severe harm (as a Personal Range spell, it does not need to penetrate his Magic Resistance).

(Base 4, +1 Diameter, +6 intensity of heat)

<span id="unified-flame"></span>
==== '''Unified Flame''' ====

ReIg Level 35

R: Arc, D: Sun, T: Group

This spell alters the target fires to resemble one another in all ways. The fires to be targeted by this spell must all be Arcane Connections to one another. The targeted fires change over the course of a few minutes to mirror one another completely in the shape of their flames, the sound of their roar and crackling, and the smoke that they produce. Any changes in one fire will be reflected in the others. The affected fires all take on a slightly unnatural appearance as their flames move into a configuration that does not completely match the logs that they are burning, and they are altered by the sigil of the casting wizard.

When Ranulf's apprentice is away from him, the apprentice is instructed to kindle a fire using a coal stored in the Chest of the Ember Seed just after sunset every evening. While this spell is normally intended to unite two fires, the spell was designed with a Target of Group. Ranulf believed that the effort required to create a spell that affected just two fires would be as great as or greater than the work needed to develop a spell that targeted a group, because of the difficulty of using non-standard Targets. As a result, more than two fires can be affected by this spell, and the caster could be completely unaware of the additional fires (possibly allowing a communication to be intercepted, see ''Discourse of Glowing Tongues'' above).

This spell is an example of magic created to match the needs of the magus. For most magi, any number of Intellego spells would provide a significantly easier method of communication. Yet for Ranulf, who has a Magical Focus in unnatural fires and the Deficient Technique Flaw with Intellego, the season that he invested to invent this spell was a wiser choice than trying to learn magics not suited to his talents.

(Base 3, +4 Arcane Connection, +2 Sun, +2 Group)

<span id="terram-spells-5"></span>
=== ''Terram Spells'' ===

<span id="transmutation-of-fire"></span>
=== '''Transmutation of Fire''' ===

MuTe(He,Ig) Level 40 R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Part

This spell transmutes an object of stone, wood, or soil, or part of some such object, into a fire. The fire is still essentially the original object and will not be extinguished for lack of fuel, but it can be doused or extinguished in other ways. The transmuted fire is no larger than 2 paces in size and it is hot enough to do +5 damage. Objects smaller than 2 paces in size will turn into fires of their own size when they are subjected to this spell.

(Base 5, + 2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 part, +1 to affect stone, +1 Herbam requisite)

<span id="vim-spells-3"></span>
=== ''Vim Spells'' ===

<span id="group-wizards-boost-form"></span>
=== '''Group Wizard's Boost (Form)''' ===

MuVi Level Gen R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Group

The magus casts this spell as another spell of a level 10 or more levels less than the ''Group Wizard's Boost'' is being multi-cast. The effect of each of the targeted spells increases five levels in power. The effects of the extra five levels of power are for the Storyguide to determine. A ''Wizard's Boost'' spell may not affect a spell more than once.

(Base General, +1 Touch, + 2 Group)

<span id="wizards-expansion-form"></span>
==== '''Wizard's Expansion (Form)''' ====

MuVi General

R: Voice, D: Momentary, T: Individual

The Target of the targeted spell increases by one category; all targets affected by the expanded spell must be legal targets for the original spell. There are ten versions of ''Wizard's Expansion'', one for each form. The targeted spell must be at least one magnitude lower than this spell. A single spell may not be affected more than once with this spell, but when two magi cooperate, a spell can be the target of both ''Wizard's Expansion'' and ''Wizard's Reach'', providing that one of the two Muto Vim spells

<span id="magi-of-hermes-58"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

is at least two magnitudes higher than the target spell.

(Base effect, +2 Voice)

<span id="the-patient-spell"></span>
==== '''The Patient Spell''' ====

ReVi Level Gen R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

When this spell is cast in conjunction with a second spell (requiring an Intelligence + Concentration roll against an Ease Factor of 9), the other spell is delayed in taking effect until the caster ceases concentration on ''The Patient Spell''. The target spell can be of no higher level than the level of ''The Patient Spel''l. A spell held using ''The Patient Spell'' may be released to interrupt an action in the same manner as a fast cast spell, requiring the same &quot;fast casting&quot; roll of Quickness + Finesse ('''ArM5''' page 83).

Ranulf uses ''The Patient Spell'' to provide himself with an opportunity to cast ''Boreal Flames'' with ''Pilum of Fire''. Maintaining concentration on ''The Patient Spell'' while casting another spell requires an Intelligence + Concentration roll against an Ease Factor of 9 to perform successfully; this is easier than normal, because the spell is designed for this use.

(Base effect, +1 Touch, + 1 Concentration)

<span id="enchanted-items-10"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Ranulf has created the following items.

<span id="ribbon-of-arcane-preservation"></span>
=== ''Ribbon of Arcane Preservation'' ===

This is an eighteen-inch-long silk ribbon with the following single effect enchanted into it as a lesser enchantment using three pawns of vis. This item was created from a set of laboratory notes passed between hoplites.

<span id="preserved-connection"></span>
==== '''Preserved Connection''' ====

CrVi 29

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Const, T: Ind

When the Ribbon of Arcane Preservation is tied around an object, the magics in the ribbon work to delay the degradation of any Arcane Connections that the object has. Arcane Connections affected by the Effect will decay as if they had a duration two levels higher on the Arcane Connection chart ('''ArM5''' page 84). Arcane Connections that

<span id="new-guidelines-crvi"></span>
=== ''New Guidelines: CrVi'' ===

Creo Vim spells and powers can be used to prolong the durations of Arcane Connections in a manner analogous to the way that Perdo Vim effects can decrease their duration. Arcane Connections under the effects of a Creo Vim spell still decay, but at a slower rate than they do naturally. An Arcane Connection that is being preserved by a Creo Vim spell does not have its penetration multiplier increased. Unlike Perdo Vim magics that permanently degrade connections instantly, Creo Vim spells only retard the decay of connections during their duration. Spell guidelines are similar to the guidelines for Perdo Vim Arcane Connection spells.

'''Level 5:''' Decrease the rate of decay of an Arcane Connection as if the connection were one step higher on the table in '''ArM5,''' page 84. If this increases the Duration to Years or greater, the duration of the connection continues to be measured in a period of years. Hermetic magic can not make an Arcane Connection last indefinitely without fixing the connection as described in '''ArM5,''' page 94. Note that the range is the range to the Arcane Connection, and you must know what you are targeting just like any other spell.

'''Level 10:''' Decrease the rate of decay of an Arcane Connection as if the connection were two steps higher on the table in '''ArM5,''' page 84, subject to the same limits as above.

'''Level 15:''' Decrease the rate of decay of an Arcane Connection as if the connection were three steps higher on the table in '''ArM5,''' page 84, subject to the same limits as above.

normally decay in hours will instead decay in weeks while the ribbon is tied around them; Arcane Connections that normally decay in days instead decay in months. The penetration multiplier for an Arcane Connection is not altered by this affect.

(Effect: Base 10, + 1 Touch, +2 Sun; Modifications +1 level 2 uses per day, +3 levels environmental trigger)

<span id="chest-of-the-ember-seed"></span>
=== ''Chest of the Ember Seed'' ===

This is a small stone box the size of an apple, that's lined with fired clay and held closed by leather straps. Ranulf has enchanted the box as a lesser enchanted device with the following power, using four pawns of vis:

<span id="bed-of-the-resting-coal"></span>
==== '''Bed of the Resting Coal''' ====

Cr Ig 34 Pen +0, constant

R: Touch, D: sun T:group

Objects that are placed within this box are heated enough to glow red-hot. Ranulf's apprentice uses this box to keep coals from a fire hot. These small portions of the original are Arcane Connections to the original fire with a Duration of Months (like a hair from a person or a feather from a bird). When a burning coal is grown into a larger fire this second fire remains an Arcane Connection to the first. While the Chest of the Ember Seed is in use, it becomes very hot over the course of hours and days. Ranulf's apprentice regularly wraps up the apple-sized chest in an insulated box and uses cold water to cool the chest's surface, and occasionally has had to resort to more drastic measures (such as Perdo Ignem spontaneous magic).

(Effect: Base 5, +2 Sun, +1 Touch, +2 Group; Modifications: +3 levels environmental trigger, +1 level 2 uses per day)

<span id="laboratory-of-ranulf"></span>
=== ''Laboratory of Ranulf'' ===

Ranulf opened the wooden room that serves as his laboratory as an invested device. The room is opened as a compound device with only the highest vis capacity component (the limestone fireplace) instilled with vis. The room was opened with twelve pawns of vis. Seven of these twelve pawns are filled with enchantments. The room has three effects invested in it.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-59"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

With reference to the laboratory personalization rules in ''Covenants'', pages 113 and 115, this item provides the Excessive Heating, Excessive Lighting, and Lesser Feature (Ignem specialization) Virtues to Ranulf's laboratory without any modifications to the laboratory's Upkeep or Safety values. While this item was being integrated into his laboratory, Ranulf's laboratory acquired the Highly Organized Virtue, as well.

<span id="eyes-of-the-acolyte"></span>
=== '''Eyes of the Acolyte''' ===

InIg 8

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Personal, D: Constant, T: Ind

This effect detects any fires in the laboratory larger than a lantern flame that are not in the fireplace or the product of the ''Facade of Pentecost'' power.

(Effect: Base 2, +2 Sun; Modifications +1 level 2 uses per day +3 levels environmental trigger)

<span id="laboratory-that-has-learned-from-experience"></span>
== '''Laboratory that has Learned from Experience''' ==

PeIg 23

Pen +0, 24/day

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Ind

This effect is triggered by the ''Eyes of the Acolyte'' power. The Laboratory of Ranulf automatically extinguishes any fires that are detected by ''Eyes of the Acolyte''. This effect is only capable of extinguishing fires that do +20 damage or less per round. This power can act to dispel Creo Ignem spells with Durations longer than Momentary, such as ''Coat of Flame'', but it is not sufficiently quick to counter a spell as it is being cast. On those occasions where Ranulf desires to have fires in his laboratory that are larger than a lantern flame, not in the fireplace, or not the product of the ''Facade of Pentecost'' power, he exhausts the 24 daily uses of this effect.

(Effect: Base 4, +3 more intense fires; Modifications +5 levels 24 uses per day +3 levels linked trigger)

<span id="facade-of-pentecost"></span>
==== '''Facade of Pentecost''' ====

Cr(Re)Ig 41

Pen +0, 50/day, item maintains concentration

R: Per D: Conc, T: Group

This effect calls into being up to ten flames that may appear at any specified point

(Effect: Base 10, +1 Rego requisite, +1 concentration, +2 group; Modifications +5 levels item maintains concentration, +6 levels 50/day)

<span id="talisman-staff-of-ranulf"></span>
= ''Talisman: Staff of Ranulf'' =

Ranulf enchanted a staff for his talisman. The staff is made of coiled lengths of ash, hazel, and oak, and it is bound with iron, inset with leaden and silver traceries, and has a tiny ruby mounted in a silver ring just above where it is held. It was originally opened with 15 pawns of vis to fill the ruby.

At age 54, Ranulf has the first four effects given below instilled into the item, filling all fifteen pawns of the item's opened capacity.

<span id="attunements-4"></span>
==== '''Attunements''' ====

* +6 to fire related effects
* +4 to control things at a distance
* +2 repel things
* +3 to divination

By the age of 84, Ranulf has opened his talisman further, using 10 more pawns of vis and enchanting ''Shriek of the Impending Shafts'' and ''Defense of the Roaring Furnace'' into his talisman, with two more corresponding attunements. This leaves four unfilled pawns capacity in the talisman.

<span id="additional-attunements"></span>
==== '''Additional Attunements''' ====

* +4 destroy things at a distance
* +4 affect dead wood.

<span id="topiary-of-flames"></span>
==== '''Topiary of Flames''' ====

ReIg 44

Pen +0, 12/day item maintains concentration

R: Voice D: Conc, T: Ind (+2 size)

This effect re-shapes a single fire into a shape desired by the wielder. The fire may stretch and extend in any direction but it can not be pulled completely away from its source of fuel, nor can the volume of the fire be increased by this effect. Ranulf typically uses this effect to change large fires into walls, bridges, and staircases, often making these features very thin and delicate to stretch the fire as far as possible. No part of the fire's new shape can be further than the range of the caster's voice. A Finesse roll should be used if exceptional precision or targeting is required. This effect can target fires of tremendous size (up to 100 times the size of a standard Ignem individual fire).

(Effect: Base10, +2 Voice, +1 concentration, +2 size; Modifications +5 levels item maintains concentration, +4 levels 12x/day)

<span id="flames-of-stone"></span>
==== '''Flames of Stone''' ====

MuIg(Te) 38

Pen +0, 3/day item maintains concentration

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind (+1 size)

This effect changes the flames of the target fire to be as hard and stable as stone. The flames still have no weight and the target fire still produces both heat and smoke. Ranulf often uses this effect in combination with the ''Topiary of Flames'' effect to create temporary structures. The target fire can be no larger

<span id="magi-of-hermes-60"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

than a small house or large hut (ten times the size of a standard Ignem individual).

(Effect: Base 10 +2 voice, +1 concentration, +1 size; Modifications +5 levels item maintains concentration, +3 levels 6 uses per day)

<span id="shadow-of-spring-times-departed"></span>
= '''Shadow of Spring Times Departed''' =

Cr(Mu)He 5 Pen +0, 1x/day R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

When ''Shadow of Spring Times Departed'' is active, the wooden sections of Ranulf's talisman slowly repair themselves of damage by growing back to their original state. The talisman heals at the speed of well-watered grass growing, and only heals when exposed to sunlight and occasional water. Scratches in the wooden parts of the talisman disappear over the course of few days, while more-substantial damage to the staff could take months to heal. This instilled power naturally cannot be activated if the staff is completely broken. The Creo nature of this power makes the staff grow back to its ideal state rather than shooting forth roots, leaves, and limbs, while the Muto requisite allows dead wood to grow as if it were alive.

(Effect: Base 3, + 2 Sun)

<span id="surfeit-of-fuel"></span>
==== '''Surfeit of Fuel''' ====

CrHe 27

Pen +0, 3/day

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group (+2 size)

This effect conjures a pile of dry wood containing the mass of several large trees. While Ranulf does occasionally use this effect to provide an abundance of firewood, he more frequently finds the creation of a large pile of wood to be valuable for other reasons.

(Effect: Base 4 +1 Touch +2 Sun, +2 size; Modifications +2 levels 3 uses per day)

<span id="shriek-of-the-impending-shafts"></span>
==== '''Shriek of the Impending Shafts''' ====

InHe 16

Pen +0, 2x/day, item maintains concentration

R: Per, D: Conc T: Hearing

With the above exceptions, this effect functions as the spell ''Shriek of the Impending Shafts'' ('''ArM5''', page 136).

(Effect: Base 2, +1 Concentration, +3 Hearing; Modifications +5 levels item maintains concentration, +1 level 2 uses per day)

<span id="defense-of-the-roaring-furnace"></span>
= '''Defense of the Roaring Furnace''' =

CrIg 58

Pen +0, unlimited uses

R: Special D: Mom T: Ind

Defense of the Roaring Furnace burns any fast-moving wooden item that comes within a pace of the holder of Ranulf's talisman with a blast of fire sufficiently intense to reduce arrows to ash and weaken pole arms to the point of snapping. Only wooden objects that are moving sufficiently fast to cause a person harm are targeted by this effect. The fires produced by this effect do +35 damage. The talisman will never target itself with this effect.

(Effect: Base 30, + 3 Voice equivalent non-standard; Modifications +10 levels unlimited uses, +3 levels linked trigger)

<span id="chapter-thirteen"></span>
=== ''Chapter Thirteen'' ===

<span id="scipio-of-merinita"></span>
= ''Scipio of Merinita'' =

'''Concept:''' Casting his magic through music and illusion, this son of a faerie king searches for his true love despite his father's interference.

Scipio of Merinita was once named Pierre, and is the son of a poor peasant woman and a faerie king of bright summer. Soon after his birth he was abducted and taken to the court of his father, where he learned to use his inherent magical powers to create music and illusions. But he was not alone, because some other very beautiful boys and girls also lived in the court. One of them was a girl named Vinella. Soon the two recognized that there was true love between them. The king was afraid of the love between his son and foster daughter (who he desired, as well) so he sold the boy to a Merinita maga. She turned the boy, who dreamed of becoming a hero to regain his beloved Vinella, into a magus. Soon after his Gauntlet he moved out to the world to find her, always watching for his father's men who try to lure him away from his quest for his true love.

<span id="scipio-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Scipio at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per 0, Pre +2, Com +2, Str –2, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 25 (20) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 0 (0) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift, Strong Faerie Blood (Sidhe); Affinity with Imaginem, Enchanting Music, Faerie Magic (free), Free Expression, Performance Magic (Music); Plagued by Supernatural Entity, True Love (NPC); Careless Sorcerer, Faerie Upbringing, Lesser Malediction (Iron burns like fire), Meddler

'''Personality Traits:''' Meddler +3, Wanderlust +3, Carefree +2, Brave +1

'''Reputations:''' Trouvere 0 (Artist)

'''Combat:'''

''Dodging:'' Int 0, Attack n/a, Defense +2, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +0

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 1 (ceremonial magic), Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 1 (spotting), Bargain 1 (music payment), Brawl 1 (dodging), Carouse 1 (drinking songs), Charm 1 (first impressions), Concentration 1 (spell concentration), Enchanting Music 2 (friendship), Etiquette 1 (faeries), Faerie Lore 1 (faerie forests), Faerie Magic 1 (spells), Finesse 1 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 1 (faeries), Guile 1 (fast talk), High French 5 (music), French Kingdom Lore 1 (towns), House Merinita Lore 1 (Initiations), Intrigue 1 (rumormongering), Latin 4 (texts), Legerdemain 1 (&quot;magic&quot; tricks), Magic Lore 1 (forests), Magic Theory 3 (spells), Music 2 (lyre), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (magi), Parma Magica 1 (Vim), Penetration 1 (Imaginem), Philosophiae 1 (ceremonial magic), Profession: Trouvere 1 (5) (love songs), Second Sight 1 (faeries), Stealth 1 (sneak), Survival 1 (finding routes), Swim 1 (rivers)

'''Arts: Cr''' 5**, In** 2, '''Mu''' 3**, Pe** 2**, Re** 6**; An** 0**, Aq** 0**, Au** 0**, Co** 6**, He** 1**, Ig** 0**, Im** 11**, Me** 0**, Te** 1**, Vi** 0

'''Twilight Scars:''' None.

'''Equipment:''' Bard's outfit, lyre, flute, bag of

&quot;magic&quot; tricks. '''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+3) ''Curse of the Unruly Tongue'' (ReCo 5/+12) ''Jump of the Lynx'' (ReCo 20/+12) ''Told Story'' (CrIm 20/+16)

<span id="story-seeds"></span>
=== ''Story Seeds'' ===

<span id="gauntlet"></span>
=== '''Gauntlet''' ===

* Scipio is searching for a covenant as a base for his quest; his new sodales could soon be involved in his search.
* The players' characters hear about a strange man who tricked some faeries and even entered the Faerie regio near the covenant. Will he also trick the nearby faeries and make them angry, or will he become an ally with good connections to the fey?
* After the characters help Scipio get closer to his love, a Quaesitor investigates whether they molested the faeries.

<span id="15-years"></span>
==== '''+15 Years''' ====

* After a long journey, Scipio visits the player characters' covenant to ask for help getting into a secure regio they know of. There a faerie hides something that might bear hints about Scipio's
* quest, but it wants proper payment.
* Scipio uses his ''Book of Images'' spell to collect the image of some magi (perhaps the characters) doing ill against the Order. Will he try to blackmail them, will they hunt him down, or is this just a trick of the faerie king's men to give Scipio a bad reputation?
* On his long journeys, Scipio finds some new vis sources that he will sell to the player characters if they help him in his quest.

''Aura of the Simple Bard'' (MuIm 15/+14)

''Faerie Flute'' (MuIm 5/+14)

''Rainbow Fire'' (MuIm 15/+14)

''Image Phantom'' (MuIm 20/+14)

''Hiding the Ill-Bred Bard'' (PeIm 15/+13)

'''Appearance:''' An ever-smiling bard with red hair, pointy ears, and strange-looking amber-colored eyes. His angular face may look like a fox from time to time. He wears multi-colored bard's clothes, and some musical instruments hang from his belt. His hat is decorated with many multi-colored feathers from strange faerie birds.

'''Sigil:''' His casting sigil is a red fox that manifests and even acts in his spells. His voting sigil is a red wand with the wooden head of a fox.

<span id="scipio-15"></span>
=== ''Scipio +15'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per 0, Pre +2, Com +2, Str –2, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 40 (20) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 3 (0) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaw:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift, Strong Faerie Blood (Sidhe); Affinity with Imaginem, Enchanting Music, Faerie Magic (free), Free Expression, Performance Magic (Music), Spell Timing; Plagued by Supernatural Entity, True love (NPC); Careless Sorcerer, Faerie Upbringing, Lesser Malediction (Iron burns like fire), Meddler, Weird Magic

'''Personality Traits:''' Meddler +3, Wanderlust +3, Carefree +2, Brave +1

'''Reputations:''' Trouvere 2 (Artist), Faerie Bard +1 (France)

'''Combat:'''

''Dodging:'' Int 0, Attack n/a, Defense +2, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +0

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 1 (ceremonial magic), Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 2 (spotting), Bargain 2 (music payment), Brawl 1 (dodging), Carouse 2 (drinking songs), Charm 1 (first impressions), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Enchanting Music 3 (friendship), Etiquette 2 (faeries), Faerie Lore 2 (faerie forests), Faerie Magic 3 (spells), Finesse 1 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 2 (faeries), Guile

<span id="magi-of-hermes-61"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

1 (fast talk), High French 5 (music), French Kingdom Lore 1 (towns), House Merinita Lore 2 (Initiations), Intrigue 1 (rumormongering), Latin 4 (texts), Legerdemain 1 (&quot;magic&quot; tricks), Magic Lore 1 (forests), Magic Theory 3 (spells), Music 3 (lyre), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (magi), Parma Magica 3 (Vim), Penetration 1 (Imaginem), Philosophiae 1 (ceremonial magic), Profession: Trouvere 2 (love songs), Second Sight 1 (faeries), Stealth 1 (sneak), Survival 1 (finding routes), Swim 1 (rivers)

'''Arts: Cr''' 9**, In** 7, '''Mu''' 8**, Pe** 5**, Re** 9**; An** 2**, Aq** 2**, Au** 2**, Co** 4**, He** 4, '''Ig''' 2**, Im** 14**, Me** 7, '''Te''' 2, '''Vi''' 2

'''Twilight Scars:''' His hair always moves as if he were a hero from an old story.

'''Equipment:''' Bard's outfit, lyre, flute, bag of &quot;magic&quot; tricks.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+12) ''Curse of the Unruly Tongue'' (ReCo 5/+13) ''Follower's Bane'' (ReCo 10/+13) ''Jump of the Lynx'' (ReCo 20/+13) ''Everlasting Music'' (ReHe(An) 15/+11) ''Book of Images'' (CrIm 15/+23) ''Told Story'' (CrIm 20/+23)

''Traveler's Foresight'' (InIm 5/+21) ''Faerie Flute'' (MuIm 5/+22) ''Aura of the Simple Bard'' (MuIm 15/+22) ''Rainbow Fire'' (MuIm 15/+22) ''Image Phantom'' (MuIm 20/ +22) ''Hiding the Ill-Bred Bard'' (PeIm 15/+19) ''Color Explosion (ReIm 15/+23) The Generous Patron'' (MuMe 15/+15)

'''Appearance:''' An ever-smiling and ageless bard with red hair, pointy ears, and strange-looking amber-colored eyes. His angular face may look like a fox from time to time. He wears multi-colored bard's clothes, and some musical instruments hang from his belt. His hat is decorated with many multi-colored feathers from strange faerie birds.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' In two seasons he Initiated the Spell Timing Mystery (and the Weird Magic Flaw), two went for building up his lab and eight for spell design. He gains 360 experience points for 12 full years. 170 experience points from these 15 years are spent on Abilities (for a total of 425), 190 experience points are spent on Arts (for a total of 305). Spells were all created in lab seasons, some with experimentation.

<span id="performance-magic-music"></span>
=== ''Performance Magic (Music)'' ===

Scipio uses the Performance Magic rules from ''The Mysteries: Revised Edition'', page 29. This lets him use singing and playing instead of words and gestures to cast spells. In addition, he can maintain concentration while he performs his music with no need for a Concentration roll.

<span id="scipio-30"></span>
=== ''Scipio +30'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per 0, Pre +2, Com +2, Str –2, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 55 (20) '''Decrepitude:''' 0

'''Warping Score:''' 4 (13) '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift, Glamour, Major Magical Focus (Glamour) (gained during Twilight), Strong Faerie Blood (Sidhe); Affinity with Imaginem, Enchanting Music, Faerie Magic (free), Free Expression, Performance Magic (Music), Spell Timing; Plagued by Supernatural Entity, True Love (NPC); Careless Sorcerer, Faerie Upbringing, Lesser Malediction (Iron burns like fire), Meddler, Vulnerable Magic (Iron, Personal), Weird Magic

'''Personality Traits:''' Meddler +3, Wanderlust +3, Carefree +2, Brave +1

'''Reputations:''' Trouvere 3 (Artist), Faerie Bard +2 (France), Troublesome Faerie Guy +1 (Order of Hermes)

'''Combat:'''

''Dodging:'' Int 0, Attack n/a, Defense +2, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +0

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 1 (ceremonial magic), Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 2 (spotting), Bargain 2 (music payment), Brawl 1 (dodging), Carouse 2 (drinking songs), Charm 2 (first impressions), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Divine Lore 1 (angels), Enchanting Music 3 (friendship), Etiquette 2 (faeries), Faerie Lore 3 (faerie forests), Faerie Magic 4 (spells), Finesse 2 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 2 (faeries), Guile 2 (fast talk), High French 5 (music), French Kingdom

<span id="glamour-spells"></span>
=== ''Glamour Spells'' ===

Scipio uses the Glamour Magic rules from ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'', pages 101-102. In short, this allows him to create illusions that are more real than other illusions: they are resisted by the Parma Magica, can do real damage, move things, and so on, but they are only affected by Imaginem spells.

Lore 2 (towns), House Merinita Lore 3 (Initiations), Intrigue 1 (rumormongering), Latin 4 (texts), Legerdemain 2 (&quot;magic&quot; tricks), Magic Lore 2 (forests), Magic Theory 3 (15) (spells), Music 3 (lyre), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (magi), Parma Magica 4 (Vim), Penetration 2 (Imaginem), Philosophiae 1 (ceremonial magic), Profession: Trouvere 2 (love songs), Second Sight 2 (faeries), Stealth 1 (sneak), Survival 2 (finding routes), Swim 1 (rivers)

'''Arts: Cr''' 9, '''In''' 7, '''Mu''' 10, '''Pe''' 5, '''Re''' 9**; An** 4**, Aq** 4**, Au** 4**, Co** 5, '''He''' 4**, Ig** 11, '''Im''' 17**, Me** 11(3), '''Te''' 4**, Vi** 4

'''Twilight Scars:''' His hair always moves as if he were a hero from an old story. Sometimes his normal illusion spells become real, like Glamours, but only in cases that are bad for Scipio.

'''Equipment:''' Bard's outfit, The Eternally Changing Lyre talisman), flute, bag of &quot;magic&quot; tricks, and a red fox on his shoulder.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+19) ''Curse of the Unruly Tongue'' (ReCo 5/+16)

''Follower's Bane'' (ReCo 10/+16)

''Jump of the Lynx'' (ReCo 20/+16)

''Everlasting Music'' (ReHe(An) 15/+15)

''Smoke of Escaping'' (CrIm 5/+30)

''Book of Images'' (CrIm 15/+30)

''Phantasmal Horse'' (CrIm 30/+39*)

''Told Story'' (CrIm 20/+30)

''Story of Legend'' (CrIm 35/+30)

''Traveler's Foresight'' (InIm 5/+28)

''Faerie Flute'' (MuIm 5/+32)

''Aura of the Simple Bard'' (MuIm 15/+32)

''Rainbow Fire'' (MuIm 15/+32)

''Image Phantom'' (MuIm 20/+32)

''Servant of Fire'' (MuIm(IgMe) 35/+37*)

''Hiding the Ill-Bred Bard'' (PeIm 15/+26)

''Color Explosion (ReIm 15/+30)''

''The Generously Patron'' (MuMe 15/+26)

\* Includes Magical Focus

'''Appearance:''' An ever-smiling and ageless bard with red hair, pointy ears, and strange-looking amber-colored eyes. His angular face may look like a fox from time to time. He wears multi-colored bard's clothes, and some musical instruments hang from his belt. His hat is decorated with many multi-colored feathers from strange faerie birds.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' He spends four seasons on his talisman, one for finding a familiar, one for binding it, two for his Mysteries (gained Glamour and Vulnerable Magic), and seven on spell design. During experimentation he made a discovery for 15 experience points in Magic Theory. He gains 330 experience for 11 full years plus 15 experience through experimentation. 150 experience from these 15 years are spent on Abilities (for a total of 575), 195 experience are spent on Arts (for a total of 500). Spells were all created in lab seasons, some with experimentation.

<span id="scipio-45"></span>
=== ''Scipio +45'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per 0, Pre +2, Com +2, Str –2, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 70 (25) '''Decrepitude:''' 0

'''Warping Score:''' 5 (18) '''Confidence Score:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift, Glamour, Major Magical Focus (Glamour) (gained during Twilight), Strong Faerie Blood (Sidhe); Affinity with Imaginem, Enchanting Music, Faerie Magic (free), Free Expression, Performance Magic (Music), Spell Timing; Plagued by Supernatural Entity, True Love (NPC); Careless Sorcerer, Faerie Upbringing, Lesser Malediction (Iron burns like fire), Meddler, Vulnerable Magic (Iron, Personal), Weird Magic

'''Personality Traits:''' Meddler +3, Wanderlust +3, Carefree +2, Brave +1

'''Reputations:''' Trouvere 3 (Artist), Faerie Bard +3 (France), Troublesome Faerie Guy +2 (Order of Hermes), Faerie Sorcerer +1 (faeries of Arcadia)

'''Combat:'''

''Dodging:'' Int 0, Attack n/a, Defense +3, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +0

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (ceremonial mag-

ic), Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 2 (spotting), Bargain 2 (music payment), Brawl 2 (dodging), Carouse 2 (drinking songs), Charm 1 (first impressions), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Divine Lore 1 (angels), Enchanting Music 3 (friendship), Etiquette 2 (faeries), Faerie Lore 4 (faerie forests), Faerie Magic 4 (spells), Finesse 3 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 2 (faeries), Guile 2 (fast talk), High French 5 (music), French Kingdom Lore 2 (towns), House Merinita Lore 3 (Initiations), Infernal Lore 1 (demons), Intrigue 2 (rumormongering), Latin 4 (texts), Legerdemain 2 (&quot;magic&quot; tricks), Magic Lore 2 (forests), Magic Theory 3 (15) (spells), Music 3 (lyre), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (magi), Parma Magica 5 (Vim), Penetration 2 (Imaginem), Philosophiae 1 (ceremonial magic), Profession: Trouvere 2 (love songs), Teaching 1 (magi), Second Sight 2 (faeries), Stealth 1 (sneak), Survival 2 (finding routes), Swim 1 (rivers)

'''Arts: Cr''' 12, '''In''' 7**, Mu** 10, '''Pe''' 5, '''Re''' 9**; An** 5**, Aq** 5, '''Au''' 5, '''Co''' 6, '''He''' 5, '''Ig''' 11, '''Im''' 20(3)''', Me''' 15, '''Te''' 5, '''Vi''' 5

'''Twilight Scars:''' His hair always moves as if he were a hero from an old story. Sometimes his normal illusion spells become real, like Glamours, but only in cases that are bad for Scipio. Many little animals that are the prey of foxes get even more nervous than normal while he is around.

'''Equipment:''' Bard's outfit, The Eternally Changing Lyre talisman, flute, bag of &quot;magic&quot; tricks, and a red fox on his shoulder.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0) '''Spells Known:'''

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+20) ''Curse of the Unruly Tongue'' (ReCo 5/+17) ''Follower's Bane'' (ReCo 10/+17)

''Jump of the Lynx'' (ReCo 20/+17)

''Everlasting Music'' (ReHe(An) 15/+16)

''Smoke of Escaping'' (CrIm 5/+36)

''Book of Images'' (CrIm 15/+36)

''Told Story'' (CrIm 20/+36)

''Phantasmal Horse'' (CrIm 30/+48*)

''Cage of Bronze'' (CrIm 30/+48*)

''Story of Legend'' (CrIm 35/+36)

''Doppelganger'' (CrIm(Me) 40/+43*)

''Garden of Eden'' (CrIm 45/+48*)

''Traveler's Foresight'' (InIm 5/+31)

''Faerie Flute'' (MuIm 5/+34)

''Aura of the Simple Bard'' (MuIm 15/+34)

''Rainbow Fire'' (MuIm 15/+34)

''Image Phantom'' (MuIm 20/+34)

''Servant of Fire'' (MuIm(IgMe) 35/+35*)

''Hiding the Ill-Bred Bard'' (PeIm 15/+30)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-62"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

''Color Explosion (ReIm 15/+33) The Generous Patron'' (MuMe 15/+30)

\* Includes Magical Focus

'''Appearance:''' An ever-smiling and ageless bard with red hair, pointy ears, and strange-looking amber-colored eyes. His angular face may look like a fox from time to time. He wears multi-colored bard's clothes, and some musical instruments hang from his belt. His hat is decorated with many multi-colored feathers from strange faerie birds.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' He spends 15 seasons with his apprentice, one for his longevity ritual, and six on spell design. He gains 270 experience points for nine full years, plus 10 experience for a half year. 120 experience are spent on Abilities (for a total of 695), 150 experience on Arts (for a total of 650). Spells were all created in lab seasons, some with experimentation.

<span id="scipio-60"></span>
=== ''Scipio +60'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per 0, Pre +2, Com +2, Str –2, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik 0

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 85 (35) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 '''Warping Score:''' 6 (18) '''Confidence Score:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift, Glamour, Major Magical Focus (Glamour) (gained during Twilight), Strong Faerie Blood (Sidhe); Affinity with Imaginem, Enchanting Music, Faerie Magic (free), Free Expression, Performance Magic (Music), Spell Timing; Plagued by Supernatural Entity, True Love (NPC); Careless Sorcerer, Faerie Upbringing, Lesser Malediction (Iron burns like fire), Meddler, Vulnerable Magic (Iron, Personal), Weird Magic

'''Personality Traits:''' Meddler +3, Wanderlust

<span id="story-seeds-1"></span>
=== ''Story Seeds'' ===

<span id="30-years"></span>
=== '''+30 Years''' ===

* Scipio finally finds a way to the tower where Vinella is imprisoned. It is in the Realm of Faerie, guarded by many of the faerie king's men. He asks the players' characters if they might help him at least to speak to his father. With Scipio's guidance they can explore this realm and finally find the tower.
* By this time, Scipio has a &quot;personal&quot; Quaesitor who devotes himself to capturing this troublesome magus.
* Scipio frees Vinella and has some time to live happily with her, but soon she will be lost again, this time because of a faerie queen who claims to be her mother!

<span id="45-years"></span>
==== '''+45 Years''' ====

* Scipio now seeks to recapture his love from her mother, a faerie queen of dark winter. He searches for an Ignem or ice magus who could help him.
* Scipio meddles with the covenant by organizing an alliance between the covenant and a faerie court without asking permission. Will the covenant accept the conditions of the pact? Or will they refuse it and make the faerie court angry?

• He seeks someone who could manufacture a ward against iron for him because of his new Vulnerable Magic Flaw. But just when he finds someone, he is also found by the faerie king's men. Will the characters help him, or deliver him to his enemy?

<span id="60-years"></span>
=== '''+60 Years''' ===

• Scipio has to fight not only against the interfering Quaesitors, but also against Vinella's mother while evading the angry attacks of his father. So he seeks a way to play both sides and escape with Vinella during the war between the two faerie courts. This may ultimately lead to a Wizard's March against him, if both sides decide to take revenge for their losses and attack other covenants. The player characters may assist Scipio and have to destroy all evidence of their involvement, their covenant might be attacked by the angry faeries, or they might join other members of the Order to hunt down the faerie bard. Whatever the outcome, Scipio and Vinella leave their home Tribunal and travel to some distant place like Scotland, Russia, or the Levant.

+3, Carefree +2, Brave +1

'''Reputations:''' Trouvere 4 (Artist), Faerie Bard +4 (France), Troublesome Faerie Guy +3 (Order of Hermes), Faerie Sorcerer +2 (Faeries of Arcadia)

'''Combat:'''

''Dodging:'' Int 0, Attack n/a, Defense +3, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +0

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (ceremonial magic), Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 2 (spotting), Bargain 2 (music payment), Brawl 2 (dodging), Carouse 2 (drinking songs), Charm 1 (first impressions), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Divine Lore 1 (angels), Enchanting Music 4 (friendship), Etiquette 2 (faeries), Faerie Lore 3 (faerie forests), Faerie Magic 4 (spells), Finesse 4 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 3 (faeries), Guile 2 (fast talk), High French 5 (music), French Kingdom Lore 2 (towns), House Merinita Lore 3 (Initiations), Infernal Lore 1 (demons), Intrigue 2 (rumormongering), Latin 4 (texts), Legerdemain 2 (&quot;magic&quot; tricks), Magic Lore 2 (forests), Magic Theory 4 (spells), Music 3 (lyre), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (magi), Parma Magica 5 (Vim), Penetration 2 (Imaginem), Philosophiae 2 (ceremonial magic), Profession: Trouvere 2 (love songs), Teaching 2 (magi), Second Sight 3 (faeries), Stealth 2 (sneak), Survival 2 (finding routes), Swim 2 (rivers)

'''Arts: Cr''' 12, '''In''' 8**, Mu** 12, '''Pe''' 11, '''Re''' 11**; An** 6**, Aq** 6, '''Au''' 6, '''Co''' 6, '''He''' 6, '''Ig''' 11, '''Im''' 25**, Me** 16, '''Te''' 6, '''Vi''' 6

'''Twilight Scars:''' His hair always moves as if he were a hero from an old story. Sometimes his normal illusion spells become real, like Glamours, but only in cases that are bad for Scipio. Many little animals that are the prey of foxes get even more nervous than normal while he is around. If he stands still his shadow turns very dark red.

'''Equipment:''' Bard's outfit, The Eternally Changing Lyre talisman, flute, bag of &quot;magic&quot; tricks, and a red fox on his shoulder.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0) '''Spells Known:'''

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+22)

''Curse of the Unruly Tongue'' (ReCo 5/+19) ''Follower's Bane'' (ReCo 10/+19)

''Jump of the Lynx'' (ReCo 20/+19)

''Everlasting Music'' (ReHe(An) 15/+19)

''Summer's Blessing'' (MuIg(Te) 30/+22)

''Smoke of Escaping'' (CrIm 5/+41) ''Book of Images'' (CrIm 15/+41)

''Told Story'' (CrIm 20/+41)

''Cage of Bronze'' (CrIm 30/+53*)

''Phantasmal Horse'' (CrIm 30/+53*)

''Story of Legend'' (CrIm 35/+41)

''Doppelganger'' (CrIm(Me) 40/+53*)

''Garden of Eden'' (CrIm 45/+53*)

''Traveler's Foresight'' (InIm 5/+37)

''Faerie Flute'' (MuIm 5/+42)

''Aura of the Simple Bard'' (MuIm 15/+42)

''Rainbow Fire'' (MuIm 15/+42)

''Image Phantom'' (MuIm 20/+42)

''Blessing the Merchant's Lineage'' (MuIm 35/+42)

''Servant of Fire'' (MuIm(IgMe) 35/+41*)

''Hiding the Ill-Bred Bard'' (PeIm 15/+40) ''Invisible Arms'' (Pe(Cr)Im25/+40)

''Color Explosion'' (ReIm 15/+40)

''The Generous Patron'' (MuMe 15/+33)

''Dancing Mania'' (ReMe 30/+29)

\* Includes Magical Focus

'''Appearance:''' An ever-smiling and ageless bard with red hair, pointy ears, and strange-looking amber-colored eyes. His angular face may look like a fox from time to time. He wears multi-colored bard's clothes, and some musical instruments hang from his belt. His hat is decorated with many multi-colored feathers from strange faerie birds.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' He spends seven seasons on spell design and one on enchanting his familiar. He gains 390 experience points for 13 full years. 150 experience are spent on Abilities (for a total of 840), 240 experience on Arts (for a total of 890). Spells were all created in lab seasons, some with experimentation.

<span id="scipio-75"></span>
=== ''Scipio +75'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per –1(0), Pre +2, Com +2, Str –2, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik –1(0)

'''Size:''' 0

'''Age:''' 100 (40)

'''Decrepitude:''' 0 (2)

'''Warping Score:''' 7 (13)

'''Confidence Score:''' 3 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift, Glamour, Major Magical Focus (Glamour) (gained during Twilight), Strong Faerie Blood (Sidhe); Affinity with Imaginem, Enchanting Music, Faerie Magic (free), Free Expression, Performance Magic (Music), Spell Timing; Plagued by Supernatural Entity, True Love (NPC); Careless Sorcerer, Faerie Upbringing, Lesser Malediction (Iron

'''Personality Traits:''' Meddler +3, Wanderlust +3, Carefree +2, Brave +1

'''Reputations:''' Trouvere 5 (Artist), Faerie Bard +4 (France), Troublesome Faerie Guy +4 (Order of Hermes), Faerie Sorcerer +3 (Faeries of Arcadia)

'''Combat:'''

''Dodging:'' Int -1, Attack n/a, Defense +2, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +0

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (ceremonial magic), Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 2 (spotting), Bargain 2 (music payment), Brawl 2 (dodging), Carouse 2 (drinking songs), Charm 1 (first impressions), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), Divine Lore 1 (angels), Enchanting Music 4 (friendship), Etiquette 2 (faeries), Faerie Lore 4 (faerie forests), Faerie Magic 5 (spells), Finesse 4 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 3 (faeries), Guile 2 (fast talk), High French 5 (music), French Kingdom Lore 2 (towns), House Merinita Lore 3 (Initiations), Infernal Lore 1 (demons), Intrigue 3 (rumormongering), Latin 4 (texts), Legerdemain 2 (&quot;magic&quot; tricks), Magic Lore 2 (forests), Magic Theory 4 (spells), Music 4 (lyre), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (magi), Parma Magica 6 (Vim), Penetration 2 (Imaginem), Philosophiae 2 (ceremonial magic), Profession: Trouvere 2 (love songs), Teaching 2 (magi), Second Sight 3 (faeries), Stealth 2 (sneak), Survival 2 (finding routes), Swim 2 (rivers)

'''Arts: Cr''' 13, '''In''' 9**, Mu** 15, '''Pe''' 14, '''Re''' 13**; An** 6**, Aq** 6, '''Au''' 9, '''Co''' 9, '''He''' 6, '''Ig''' 11, '''Im''' 27**, Me** 18, '''Te''' 6, '''Vi''' 6

'''Twilight Scars:''' His hair always moves as if he were a hero from an old story. Sometimes his normal illusion spells become real, like Glamours, but only in cases that are bad for Scipio. Many little animals that are the prey of foxes get even more nervous than normal while he is around. If he stands still his shadow turns very dark red. Every single hair from his head is a tiny piece of copper; they can be melted down and made into products.

'''Equipment:''' Bard's outfit, The Eternally Changing Lyre talisman, flute, bag of &quot;magic&quot; tricks, The Bottomless Bag (lesser enchanted device), and a red fox on his shoulder.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Bridge of Gnomes'' (CrAu 15/+22)

''Rainbow Bridge'' (MuAu 20/+29)

''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+26)

''Curse of the Unruly Tongue'' (ReCo 5/+24)

''Follower's Bane'' (ReCo 10/+24)

''Jump of the Lynx'' (ReCo 20/+24)

''Everlasting Music'' (ReHe(An) 15/+21)

''Summer's Blessing'' (MuIg(Te) 30/+26)

''Smoke of Escaping'' (CrIm 5/+44)

''Book of Images'' (CrIm 15/+44)

''Told Story'' (CrIm 20/+44)

''Cage of Bronze'' (CrIm 30/+57*)

''Phantasmal Horse'' (CrIm 30/+57*)

''Story of Legend'' (CrIm 35/+44)

''Doppelganger'' (CrIm(Me) 40/+57*)

''Garden of Eden'' (CrIm 45/+57*)

''Traveler's Foresight'' (InIm 5/+40)

''Faerie Flute'' (MuIm 5/+47)

''Aura of the Simple Bard'' (MuIm 15/+47)

''Rainbow Fire'' (MuIm 15/+47)

''Image Phantom'' (MuIm 20/+47)

''Safe Heaven'' (MuIm 20/+47)

''Blessing the Merchant's Lineage'' (MuIm 35/+47)

''Servant of Fire'' (MuIm(IgMe) 35/+42*)

''Hiding the Ill-Bred Bard'' (PeIm 15/+45)

''Invisible Arms'' (Pe(Cr)Im25/+45)

''Color Explosion'' (ReIm 15/+44)

''The Generous Patron'' (MuMe 15/+38)

''Stolen Moments'' (PeMe 35/+32)

''Sinister Road'' (ReMe 20/+33)

''Dancing Mania'' (ReMe 30/+33)

\* Includes Magical Focus

'''Appearance:''' An ever-smiling and ageless bard with red hair, pointy ears, and strangelooking amber-colored eyes. His angular face may look like a fox from time to time. He wears multi-colored bard's clothes, and some musical instruments hang from his belt. His hat is decorated with many multi-colored feathers from strange faerie birds. A gift from his lady (a blue piece of silk) is wrapped around his arm.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' He spends seven seasons on spell design, one for rebuilding his lab (after destroying it in experimentation), one on his familiar (reforging the bond), two for his talisman, and one for a magical item. He gains 360 experience points for 12 full years. 155 experience are spent on Abilities (for a total of 995), 205 experience on Arts (for a total of 1095). Spells were all created in lab seasons, some with experimentation.

<span id="scipio-90"></span>
=== ''Scipio +90'' ===

'''Characteristics:''' Int +1, Per –1, Pre +2(1), Com +2, Str –2, Sta -1, Dex +2, Qik –1

'''Size:''' 0 '''Age:''' 115 (50) '''Decrepitude:''' 0 (4) '''Warping Score:''' 8 (3)

'''Confidence Score:''' 3 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift, Glamour, Major Magical Focus (Glamour) (gained during Twilight), Strong Faerie Blood (Sidhe); Affinity with Imaginem, Enchanting Music, Faerie Magic (free), Free Expression, Performance Magic (Music), Spell Timing; Plagued by Supernatural Entity, True Love (NPC); Careless Sorcerer, Faerie Upbringing, Lesser Malediction (Iron burns like fire), Meddler, Vulnerable Magic (Iron, Personal), Weird Magic

'''Personality Traits:''' Meddler +3, Wanderlust +3, Carefree +2, Brave +1

'''Reputations:''' Trouvere 5 (Artist), Faerie Bard +4 (France), Troublesome Faerie Guy +4 (Order of Hermes), Faerie Sorcerer +3 (Faeries of Arcadia), Faerie Bard +1 (new home tribunal)

<span id="combat-7"></span>
==== '''Combat:''' ====

''Dodging:'' Int -1, Attack n/a, Defense +2, Damage n/a

'''Soak:''' +0

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 2 (ceremonial magic), Athletics 2 (running), Awareness 2 (spotting), Bargain 2 (music payment), Brawl 2 (dodging), Carouse 3 (drinking songs), Charm 2 (first impressions), Concentration 3 (spell concentration), Divine Lore 1 (angels), Enchanting Music 4 (friendship), Etiquette 2 (faeries), Faerie Lore 4 (faerie forests), Faerie Magic 6 (spells), Finesse 4 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 3 (faeries), Guile 2 (fast talk), High French 5 (music), French Kingdom Lore 2 (towns), House Merinita Lore 3 (Initiations), Infernal Lore 1 (demons), Intrigue 3 (rumormongering), Latin 4 (texts), Legerdemain 3 (&quot;magic&quot; tricks), Magic Lore 2 (forests), Magic Theory 5 (spells), Music 4 (lyre), Order of Hermes Lore 2 (magi), Parma Magica 7 (Vim), Penetration 2 (Imaginem), Philosophiae 2 (ceremonial magic), Profession: Trouvere 2 (love songs), Teaching 2 (magi), Second Sight 3 (faeries), Stealth 2 (sneak), Survival 2 (finding route), Swim 2 (rivers)

'''Arts: Cr''' 16, '''In''' 10**, Mu** 15, '''Pe''' 14, '''Re''' 15**; An** 6**, Aq** 6, '''Au''' 9, '''Co''' 10, '''He''' 6, '''Ig''' 11, '''Im''' 28**, Me** 19, '''Te''' 6, '''Vi''' 6

'''Twilight Scars:''' His hair always moves as if he were a hero from an old story. Sometimes his normal illusion spells become real, like Glamours, but only in cases that are bad for Scipio. Many little animals that are the prey of foxes get even more nervous than normal while he is around. If he stands still his shadow turns very dark red. Every single hair from his head is a tiny piece of copper; they can be melted down and made into products.

'''Equipment:''' Bard's outfit, The Eternally Changing Lyre talisman, flute, bag of &quot;magic&quot; tricks, The Bottomless Bag (lesser enchanted device), and a red fox on his shoulder.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

<span id="story-seeds-2"></span>
=== ''Story Seeds'' ===

<span id="75-years"></span>
==== '''+75 Years''' ====

• Finally Scipio and Vinella live together somewhere in a distant country away from urban civilization. They hide with Scipio's illusion magic. But sometimes Scipio is filled with wanderlust and he puts on his shoes and walks out the door. He is too careless to think about all the people (two faerie courts and perhaps some Quaesitors) who are still hunting him. Meanwhile, he searches for another apprentice and vis, as well as adventures and young heroes who he can help with their personal quests.

<span id="90-years"></span>
==== '''+90 Years''' ====

* Scipio instructs his second apprentice in some of his new silly spells, but the young one uses them to embarrass a mundane lord in front of his men. Scipio seeks out other magi who can deal with this, as he's afraid solving the problem on his own would bring him to the Quaesitores' attention.
* His ''Image of the Lady'' spell becomes highly sought after by many covenants. The players' covenant still has none, so they'll need to find this notorious artist to get their hands on some of his useful creations.

<span id="spells-known-6"></span>
=== '''Spells Known:''' ===

''Bridge of Gnomes'' (CrAu 15/+25) ''Rainbow Bridge'' (MuAu 20/+29) ''Eyes of the Cat'' (MuCo(An) 5/+26) ''High Tree or Small Boulder'' (MuCo 20/+30) ''Curse of the Unruly Tongue'' (ReCo 5/+27) ''Follower's Bane'' (ReCo 10/+27) ''Jump of the Lynx'' (ReCo 20/+27) ''How God Created Them'' (MuHe(An) 25/+26) ''Everlasting Music'' (ReHe(An) 15/+23) ''Summer's Blessing'' (MuIg(Te) 30/+26) ''Smoke of Escaping'' (CrIm 5/+48) ''Book of Images'' (CrIm 15/+48) ''Told Story'' (CrIm 20/+48) ''Cage of Bronze'' (CrIm 30/+64*) ''Phantasmal Horse'' (CrIm 30/+64*) ''Story of Legend'' (CrIm 35/+48) ''Doppelganger'' (CrIm(Me) 40/+64*) ''Image of the Lady'' (CrIm(Me) 40/+39) ''Garden of Eden'' (CrIm 45/+64*) ''Traveler's Foresight'' (InIm 5/+42) ''Faerie Flute'' (MuIm 5/+48) ''Aura of the Simple Bard'' (MuIm 15/+48) ''Rainbow Fire'' (MuIm 15/+48) ''Image Phantom'' (MuIm 20/+48) ''Safe Heaven'' (MuIm 20/+48) ''Ogre's Stench'' (MuIm 30/+48) ''Blessing the Merchant's Lineage'' (MuIm 35/+48)

''Servant of Fire'' (MuIm(IgMe) 35/+42*)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-63"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

''Hiding the Ill-Bred Bard'' (PeIm 15/+46) ''Invisible Arms'' (Pe(Cr)Im25/+46) ''Color Explosion'' (ReIm 15/+47) ''The Generous Patron'' (MuMe 15/+39) ''Stolen Moments'' (PeMe 35/+33) ''Sinister Road'' (ReMe 20/+36) ''Dancing Mania'' (ReMe 30/+36) ''Endless Laughter'' (ReMe 30/+36) * Includes Magical Focus

'''Appearance:''' An ever-smiling and ageless bard with copper-red hair, pointy ears, and strange-looking amber-colored eyes. His angular face may look like a fox from time to time. He wears multicolored bard's clothes, and some musical instruments hang from his belt. His hat is decorated with many multi-colored feathers from strange faerie birds. A gift from his lady (a blue piece of silk) is wrapped around his arm.

'''Activities in the last 15 years''': He spends eight seasons inventing new spells, 15 for teaching his apprentice, and one for his longevity ritual. He gains 270 experience points for 9 full years. 55 experience are spent on Abilities (for a total of 1050), 200 experience on Arts (for a total of 1295). Spells were all created in lab seasons, some with experimentation.

Scipio has developed these spells.

<span id="auram-spells-2"></span>
=== ''Auram Spells'' ===

<span id="bridge-of-gnomes"></span>
=== '''Bridge of Gnomes''' ===

CrAu 15

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual

This spell creates a rainbow up to seven miles long. It only works outdoors.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 very unnatural fashion)

<span id="rainbow-bridge"></span>
==== '''Rainbow Bridge''' ====

MuAu 30

R:Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual

This spell gives an existing rainbow the hardness of good stone or iron. It is still colorful and you can see through it; only the hardness is changed. With rainbows like these you can build bridges into the sky that can be used by creatures other than gnomes.

(Base 10, +3 Sight, +2 Sun, –1 for only one property change)

<span id="corpus-spells-7"></span>
=== ''Corpus Spells'' ===

<span id="high-tree-or-small-boulder"></span>
==== '''High Tree or Small Boulder''' ====

MuCo 20

R: Voice, D:Sun, T: Individual

The spell's target either grows to three paces tall or shrinks to only a half pace in height, but his mass isn't affected. As a result, the target is either a thin giant who cannot control his body parts normally, or he is a tiny, fat dwarf who rather rolls than walks.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 because this spell allows growth and shrinking)

<span id="followers-bane"></span>
==== '''Follower's Bane''' ====

ReCo 10

R: Road, D: Sun, T: Individual

The magus can hex someone he senses via normal or magical senses who stands on the same road. The target's legs starts to spasm in a way that makes it impossible to

'''Magic Might:''' 10 (Imaginem)

'''Characteristics:''' Int +2, Per 0, Pre +2, Com +3, Str –3, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik +4

'''Size:''' –2 '''Age:''' n/a

'''Confidence Score:''' 2 (5)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' Magic Animal; Magical Friend; Great Quickness, Luck, Perfect Balance, Puissant Guile, Self-Confident, Well-Traveled; Wanderlust, Greedy (minor), Nocturnal

'''Magical Qualities and Inferiorities:''' Ritual Power, Gift of Speech, Improved Characteristics (x2), Improved Abilities (x3), Lesser Power, Personal Power; Reduced Attack

'''Personality Traits:''' Fox +3, Wanderlust +5, Greedy +3, Carefree +2

'''Combat:'''

''Bite:'' Init +4, Attack +5, Defense +7, Damage –2

'''Soak:''' 0

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–3), –3 (4–6), –5 (7– 9), Incapacitated (10–12), Dead (13+)

'''Abilities:''' Athletics 3 (sprinting), Area Lore (Normandy) 3 (towns), Artes Liberales 1 (reading), Awareness 3 (coins), Bargain 3 (hard sell), Brawl 1 (bite), Carouse 3 (drinking), Charm 3 (first impressions), Folk Ken 3 (peasants), Guile 5+2 (fast talking), High French 5 (peasants), Hunt 3 (birds), Latin 4 (magi), Legerdemain 3 (picking pockets), Magical Lore 3 (forest), Magic Theory 2 (Imaginem), Music 3 (singing), Stealth 3 (hiding), Survival 3 (forest)

'''Bond Scores:''' Bronze +1, Silver +2, Gold +2 '''Powers:'''

''Perfect Liar,'' 4 points, Init +1, Corpus*:* (R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group) Felix grants himself or someone else a +3 bonus on all Guile rolls. MuCo 20 (base 2, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group): Lesser Power (20 levels, +1 Init)

''Grant Luck'', 5 points, Init –6, Imaginem: (R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual) Felix gives some of his luck to the target, granting him the Luck Virtue. No Hermetic equivalent: Ritual Power

''Human Form,'' 1 point, Init +2, Corpus: (R: Pe,r D: Sun, T: Ind) Gives the fox the body of a human. MuCo 20 (base 10, +2 Sun): Personal Power (20 levels, –1 Might cost)

'''Familiar Powers:''' none

'''Vis:''' 2 pawns of Imaginem vis located in his twisted tail.

'''Appearance:''' A small red fox with an exceptionally long, twisted tail. When he transforms into a human he speaks with a smooth voice, has red hair with a red beard, green eyes, and normal stature.

Felix stepped into this world with an intense urge to wander, visit the humans, and take part in their lives. In the great city of Paris he improved his skill at lying, gambling, and thieving, and felt as though he was now perfect. But the time away from his Magic aura weakened his powers, and he also attracted some demons who wanted to make him a member of their realm. But luckily Scipio (30 years out of his Gauntlet) found him before he was lured away, saving him from losing more of his powers and becoming Infernal. After this, both traveled to many countries, adventuring and getting into a great deal of trouble that they both survived thanks to their immense luck.

<span id="felix-15-years"></span>
==== '''Felix +15 Years''' ====

'''Magical Qualities and Inferiorities:''' Ritual Power, Gift of Speech, Improved Characteristics (x2), Improved Abilities (x4), Lesser Power, Personal Power; Reduced Attack

'''Abilities:''' Athletics 3 (sprinting), Area Lore (Normandy) 3 (towns), Artes Liberales 2 (reading), Awareness 3 (coins), Bargain 3 (hard sell), Brawl 1 (bite), Carouse 3 (drinking), Charm 3 (first impressions), Folk Ken 3 (peasants), Guile 5+2 (5) (fast talking), High French 5 (peasants), Hunt 3 (birds), Latin 4 (magi), Legerdemain 3 (picking pockets), Magical Lore 3 (forest), Magic Theory 4 (Imaginem), Music 3 (singing), Stealth 3 (hiding), Survival 3 (forest)

<span id="felix-30-years"></span>
==== '''Felix +30 Years''' ====

'''Magical Qualities and Inferiorities:''' Ritual Power, Gift of Speech, Improved Characteristics (x2), Improved Abilities (x5), Lesser Power, Personal Power (2x); Reduced Attack

'''Abilities:''' Athletics 3 (sprinting), Area Lore (Normandy) 3 (towns), Artes Liberales 2 (reading), Awareness 3 (coins), Bargain 3 (hard sell), Brawl 1 (bite), Carouse 3 (drinking), Charm 3 (first impressions), Folk Ken 3 (peasants), Guile 6+2 (fast talking), High French 5 (peasants), Hunt 3 (birds), Latin 4 (magi), Legerdemain 3 (picking pockets), Magical Lore 3 (forest), Magic Theory 5 (Imaginem), Music 3 (singing), Stealth 3 (hiding), Survival 3 (forest)

'''Powers:''' ''Sight Beyond Sight,'' 1 point, Animal (R: Per, D: Conc, T: Vision): All five senses operate at a distance, as far as he can see. This gives him supernatural awareness of everything that occurs, and it is exceptionally difficult to catch him by surprise, InIm 30 (base 5, +1 Conc, +4 Vision): Personal Power x 2 (20 levels, –2 Might cost, +2 Init)

'''Familiar Powers:''' Shared Senses

<span id="felix-45-years"></span>
==== '''Felix +45 Years''' ====

'''Magical Qualities and Inferiorities:''' Ritual Power, Gift of Speech, Improved Characteristics (x2), Improved Abilities (x6), Lesser Power, Personal Power (2x); Reduced Attack

'''Abilities:''' Athletics 3 (sprinting), Area Lore (Normandy) 3 (towns), Artes Liberales 2 (reading), Awareness 3 (coins), Bargain 3 (hard sell), Brawl 1 (bite), Carouse 4 (drinking), Charm 3 (first impressions), Folk Ken 3 (peasants), Guile 6+2 (fast talking), High French 5 (peasants), Hunt 3 (birds), Latin 4 (magi), Legerdemain 3 (picking pockets), Magical Lore 4 (forest), Magic Theory 5 (Imaginem), Music 3 (singing), Stealth 3 (hiding), Survival 3 (forest)

'''Bond Scores:''' Bronze +1, Silver +3, Gold +3

<span id="felix-60-years"></span>
==== '''Felix +60 Years''' ====

'''Magical Qualities and Inferiorities:''' Ritual Power, Gift of Speech, Improved Characteristics (x2), Improved Abilities (x8), Lesser Power, Personal Power (2x); Reduced Attack

'''Abilities:''' Athletics 4 (sprinting), Area Lore (Normandy) 3 (towns), Artes Liberales 2 (reading), Awareness 3 (coins), Bargain 3 (hard sell), Brawl 1 (bite), Carouse 4 (drinking), Charm 3 (first impressions), Folk Ken 4 (peasants), Guile 7+2 (fast talking), High French 5 (peasants), Hunt 3 (birds), Latin 4 (magi), Legerdemain 4 (picking pockets), Magical Lore 4 (forest), Magic Theory 6 (Imaginem), Music 3 (singing), Stealth 3 (hiding), Survival 3 (forest)

<span id="jump-of-the-lynx"></span>
==== '''Jump of the Lynx''' ====

ReCo 20

R: Personal, D: Diameter, T: Individual Like ''Gift of the Frog's Legs,'' but with an additional magnitude to avoid the risk of falling. While the spell is working, the caster can make multiple jumps because of its Diameter Duration. Scipio has used this spell to escape when an angry mob was after him.

(Base 10, +1 Diameter, +1 for no falling damage)

<span id="herbam-spells-6"></span>
=== ''Herbam Spells'' ===

<span id="how-god-created-them"></span>
=== '''How God Created Them''' ===

MuHe(An) 25

R: Voice, D: Momentary, T:Group

All the clothes worn by one person that are made out of animal or plant products become larger and slippery, and slide down to the ground leaving the victim of the spell naked.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Group, +1 Animal requisite)

<span id="everlasting-music"></span>
==== '''Everlasting Music''' ====

ReHe(An) 20

R: Touch, D: While (being carried), T: Individual

This spell makes a stringed, wooden instrument play music. The spell lasts until the instrument is put down, which, if it is tied to someone's belt, might not be for a very long time. The Animal requisite is for the strings of such an instrument.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 While, +1 Animal requisite, +1 complexity)

<span id="ignem-spells-5"></span>
=== ''Ignem Spells'' ===

<span id="summers-blessing"></span>
==== '''Summer's Blessing''' ====

MuIg(Te) 30

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Individual

This spell turns the heat and flames of a large campfire into a small, very hard object, such as a gem or a piece of metal. If the object is broken the flame returns, but it dies if there is nothing to burn. While the spell lasts, the object is constantly emitting heat equal to a warm summer's day; this heat warms everything within a few paces.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, requisite is free, +1 constantly releasing heat)

<span id="imaginem-spells-5"></span>
=== ''Imaginem Spells'' ===

<span id="smoke-of-escaping"></span>
==== '''Smoke of Escaping''' ====

CrIm 5

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual Creates the illusion of a thick cloud of red smoke in the caster's vicinity.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +1 Diameter, +1 size, +1 impenetrable to sight)

<span id="book-of-images"></span>
==== '''Book of Images''' ====

CrIm 15

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Individual

This spell creates moving sounds and images that are stored in a circle (such as a drawn circle on paper) as long as it is intact. With this spell it is possible to create a whole book or gallery of fantastic images and talking pictures, but only if proper Finesse rolls are made.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Ring, +1 moving images, +1 intricacy)

<span id="told-story"></span>
==== '''Told Story''' ====

CrIm 20

R: Voice, D: Performance, T: Individual Creates the images and sounds of a story sung by the bard, which change along with the story. This spell only creates a small three-dimensional stage on which the story is told, but no true persons. Scipio can sing the story displayed on the stage without losing concentration, because of his Performance Magic (Music) Virtue.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Performance +2 changing images, +1 intricacy)

<span id="cage-of-bronze"></span>
==== '''Cage of Bronze''' ====

CrIm 30

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Individual

This Glamour spell (see page 101 in ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'') creates a big bronze cage around the target, capturing it

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

<span id="phantasmal-horse"></span>
==== '''Phantasmal Horse''' ====

CrIm 30

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual

This Glamour spell (see page 101 in ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'') creates a magical and beautiful riding horse. Due to their faerie nature, such horses are always strangely colored or behave in some other ridiculous way. Scipio's horses are always red and curious.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 moving parts)

<span id="story-of-legend"></span>
==== '''Story of Legend''' ====

CrIm 35

R: Voice, D: Performance, T: Group

This spell is similar to ''Told Story'', but instead of creating a small stage as an Individual, this spell can create up to 100 persons or things like clouds, small dragons, and so on.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Performance, +2 Group, +1 size, +2 changing images, +1 intricacy)

<span id="doppelganger"></span>
=== '''Doppelganger''' ===

CrIm(Me) 40

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual

This Glamour spell (see page 101 in ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'') creates a person's doppelganger, with some limited freedom and simulated intellect. It may act independently but is under the caster's control. Like all Glamour spells, the doppelganger has substance and can act as something that really exists.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Mentem requisite, +1 copy of someone, +1 moving parts)

<span id="image-of-the-lady"></span>
==== '''Image of the Lady''' ====

CrIm(Me) 40

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

Similar to ''Book of Images'' and the spell ''The Shadow of Human Life'' ('''ArM5,''' page 144) this spell creates an image of a person, which can also make sounds, within a ring that serves as a frame. This image has limited freedom and a simulated intellect. He or she cannot learn Abilities, but can remember a story told while casting the spell. Such an image can also

work as a guard or similar. In Scipio's home covenant these pictures hang on almost every wall, working as advisors for slow grogs, as monitors in the kitchens, or as sentries.

Due to experimentation, Scipio's version of this spell creates images that need to sleep and eat illusionary meals.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 intricacy, +6 Mentem requisite, for a very elaborate effect)

<span id="garden-of-eden"></span>
=== '''Garden of Eden''' ===

CrIm 45

R: Voice, D: Concentration, T: Part

This Glamour spell (see page 101 in ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'') creates a nearly perfect world around the caster, in which everything is so beautiful that it almost hurts the eye. Most human beings, many animals, and even some faeries lose any desire to fight or argue. While casting, the magus makes a Finesse roll, the result of which is the Ease Factor of a Personality Trait roll to resist this effect. Appropriate Personality Traits would be anger, hatred, violent, and so on. This spell needs to Penetrate to work.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +1 Concentration, +1 Part, +1 size, +2 extremely beautiful and detailed surroundings)

<span id="travelers-foresight"></span>
==== '''Traveler's Foresight''' ====

InIm 5

R: Road, D: Concentration, T: Individual The magus can see and hear the nearest person on the road he is traveling.

(Base 2, +2 Road, +1 Concentration)

<span id="faerie-flute"></span>
==== '''Faerie Flute''' ====

MuIm 4

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual

Enchants a person or a music instrument to make clearer, sharper, and more-melodious sounds. A bard using this instrument often lures faeries to him.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="aura-of-the-simple-bard"></span>
==== '''Aura of the Simple Bard''' ====

MuIm 15

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Individual

Alters the appearance of a person to make him look more innocent and trustworthy. His facial features become softer and more childish. The character receives a +3 on appropri-

<span id="magi-of-hermes-64"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

ate rolls. This doesn't undo the effects of The Gift (see page 75 of '''ArM5'''), but works well for magi who have the Gentle Gift.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

<span id="living-fire"></span>
==== '''Living Fire''' ====

MuIm 25

R: Voice, D: Fire, T: Individual

This spell alters the image, sound, and smell of campfire or bonfire to something the caster chooses, such as a dancing woman or a dragon's head. The real flame is not changed, so you won't be burned by the parts of the image that extend outside of it, like the flaming breath of the dragon's head.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +3 Fire, +1 moving images)

<span id="safe-haven"></span>
==== '''Safe Haven''' ====

MuIm 20

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Structure

Changes the image of a building, even one quite extravagant like a small wizard's tower, to a that of a poor and small hut.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +3 Moon, +3 Structure)

<span id="ogres-stench"></span>
==== '''Ogre's Stench''' ====

MuIm 30

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group

You change the targets' smell (up to 100 people) in such a disgusting and awful way that they and every person near them must make Stamina rolls against an Ease Factor of 6 or act with a –3 penalty to all rolls. If they botch, they throw up.

(Base 1, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group, +1 size, +2 very &quot;detailed&quot; smell)

<span id="blessing-the-merchants-lineage"></span>
== '''Blessing the Merchant's Lineage''' ==

MuIm35

R: Touch, D: Until (Baptism), T: Bloodline, Ritual

This spell changes all members of a bloodline so that they look more trustworthy, their voices are softer if needed, and they seem to be smiling whenever appropriate. This gives the whole bloodline a +3 on rolls that involve gaining trust or convincing others. But if anyone in the bloodline gets baptized the duration ends, so this spell is usually only used by pagans. It uses the Spell Timing mystery (see page 100 in ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'').

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +4 Until, +3 Bloodline)

<span id="servant-of-fire"></span>
==== '''Servant of Fire''' ====

MuIm(Ig,Me) 45

R: Voice, D: Fire, T: Individual

This Glamour spell (see page 101 in ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'') turns a normal fire into a human servant. He has a simple intellect and is good for only simple tasks, but has no possibility of learning or free will. The servant must eat a lot of wood or other flammable materials, otherwise the fire will burn out, ending the spell. As long as the servant eats enough, however, the spell continues.

This spell has a minor side effect from experimentation that makes the servant sing instead of speaking normally.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +3 Fire, +1 Mentem requisite, +1 moving parts)

<span id="hiding-the-ill-bred-bard"></span>
==== '''Hiding the Ill-Bred Bard''' ====

PeIm 15

R: Personal, D: Sun, T: Individual

Destroys the magus' image species and makes him invisible except for his shadow.

(Base 4, +2 Sun, +1 changing image)

<span id="invisible-arms"></span>
==== '''Invisible Arms''' ====

Pe(Cr)Im 25

R: Personal, D: Sun, T: Part

The caster's original arms are made invisible, but the illusion of another pair of arms is created to replace them. If he wishes, the magus may use these fake arms in a normal way while his invisible arms pick pockets or cast a spell. This may require a Concentration roll depending on the fake actions; anything much more complex than swinging them while walking requires a roll.

(Base 4, +2 Sun, +1 Part, +1 changing image, +1 Creo requisite)

<span id="color-explosion"></span>
==== '''Color Explosion''' ====

ReIm 15

R: Voice, D: Diameter, T: Individual

The image of the spell's target seems to explode in a great whirlwind of colors and fragments of the original image. The explosion has a radius of two paces for a human with Size 0, changing appropriately for

targets of different Sizes. This makes the target effectively invisible as far as combat is concerned, and no visual clues to his precise location can be picked out of the chaos. For rules for fighting an invisible enemy see ''Houses of Hermes: Societates,'' pages 32-33. This spell is best used with ''Discern Own Illusions''.

(Base 1, +2 Voice, +1 Diameter, +2 fast moving image, +1 change with movements)

<span id="mentem-spells-5"></span>
=== ''Mentem Spells'' ===

<span id="the-generous-patron"></span>
==== '''The Generous Patron''' ====

MuMe 15

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Individual

This spell changes the common sense (see ''Art and Academe,'' page 33) of the target. He cannot estimate the true worth of his belongings and is likely to give more of them for less.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

<span id="stolen-moments"></span>
==== '''Stolen Moments''' ====

PeMe 35

R: Eye, D: Concentration, T: Individual This spell removes all active thoughts, memories, and emotions from a person's mind for as long as the spell lasts, so he cannot think or perceive. During this time the person becomes motionless, and cannot resist if he is moved or attacked; he does not notice anything and cannot remember anything that happens while he is under influence of this spell.

(Base 25, +1 Eye, +1 Concentration)

<span id="sinister-road"></span>
==== '''Sinister Road''' ====

ReMe 20

R: Road, D: Moon, T: Individual

Someone walking on the road whom the caster can sense is imbued with a bad feeling about what lies before him; he usually turns away from the road and walks back. This spell works similarly to ''The Shrouded Glen''.

(Base 3, +2 Road, +3 Moon)

<span id="dancing-mania"></span>
==== '''Dancing Mania''' ====

ReMe 30

R: Voice, D: Concentration, T: Individual

<span id="magi-of-hermes-65"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

The target of the spell dances in a wild and ecstatic way for as long as the caster concentrates. The target dances so fast and wildly that he must make a Stamina roll against an Ease Factor of 6 every round to avoid losing a Fatigue level.

(Base 15, +2 Voice, +1 Concentration)

<span id="endless-laughter"></span>
==== '''Endless Laughter''' ====

ReMe 30

R: Voice, D: Concentration, T: Individual The target's body is shaken by loud, uncontrollable laughter that makes normal breathing or acting nearly impossible. Every round the target must make a Stamina roll against an Ease Factor of 6, or lose a Fatigue level. If this spell lasts longer than one hour, the target may suffer from an imbalance of his sanguine humor, causing the symptoms of a disease.

(Base 15, +2 Voice, +1 Concentration)

<span id="enchanted-items-11"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Scipio's creations include the following.

<span id="bottomless-bag"></span>
=== ''Bottomless Bag'' ===

A bag made from dragon leather. It is a lesser enchanted device made with experimentation in one season, using 4 pawns of vis in total.

<span id="bag-without-bottom"></span>
==== '''Bag without Bottom''' ====

MuIm 30

Pen +9, +2/day, constant effect R: Personal D: Sun T: Room

The Glamour enchantment (see page 101 in ''Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults'') inside this bag makes the space inside it far bigger than it should be. More than 200 liters would fit into it, but because the weight isn't reduced there is still a limit on the wielder. You could put a whole human body inside this bag, if you could bear its weight. If you're searching for something inside it, you could be forced to crawl into it.

(Base 10, +2 Sun, +2 Room; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger for total of 34 levels)

A lyre made from a cinnamon tree, with a magnet and mercury inside a glass stone on the front. 16 pawns were used to open it, 7 for instilling effects. The original lyre was a great work from one of the finest instrument makers in France. It gives the user a +3 on all Music rolls (see ''City &amp; Guild,'' page 69).

'''Attunements'''

* +4 Imaginem
* +5 Muto
* +2 Rego

<span id="invisible-musician"></span>
==== '''Invisible Musician''' ====

ReAn 5

Pen +0, 12/day, item maintains concentration R: Personal, D: Concentration, T: Individual

Makes the lyre play music that the user can change by concentrating.

(Effect: Base 1, +1 Concentration, +1 complexity; +4 12/day, +5 maintains concentration for a total of 12 levels)

<span id="unaging-wood"></span>
==== '''Unaging Wood''' ====

MuHe 5

Pen +0, 2/day constant effect

R: Personal, D: Sun, T: Individual

Makes the lyre hard and flexible like good sheet metal. This gives a small penalty of –1 to music rolls.

(Effect: Base 4, +2 Sun; +3 levels environmental trigger, +1 level 2/day, for a total of 14 levels)

<span id="dance-horror"></span>
==== '''Dance Horror''' ====

ReMe 35

Pen +0, 12/day

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Individual

Makes the target dance until he has no Fatigue levels or the duration ends. Every round he has to make an Stamina roll against an Ease Factor of 6, or lose a Fatigue level.

(Effect: Base 15, +2 Voice, +2 Sun; +4 12/day, for a total of 39 levels)

<span id="chapter-fourteen"></span>
=== ''Chapter Fourteen'' ===

<span id="tolides-of-flambeau"></span>
= ''Tolides of Flambeau'' =

'''Concept:''' The apprentice of a marched Infernalist, he is obsessed with darkness and cold as a result of the influence of demons that still surround him, waiting for him to fall.

Born a Silesian bond-slave, Tolides of Flambeau served his tormenting master in the performance of all kinds of malicious deeds in service to the Infernal powers, spreading fear and terror in eastern Europe. As he served, the darkness took hold in his soul, until he truly was as evil as his victims believed him. With his conscience dead and his fear of his master fading, he seized the opportunity to aid the Quaesitores of the Order when his powerful mentor was Marched. This momentous decision made Tolides a sinister husk of a young magus, unable to cope with his ownerless freedom, or to fit into a Hermetic or mundane environment. Cursed by his heritage to only exist in places where the sun never shines, he now lives at the fringe of society, clinging to his studies in the hope of finding oblivion some day. Tolides is formally a member of House Flambeau, but maintains no ties to the politics of the Order. His Housemates are not keen to claim him as one of them.

Having never known love, but only the foul and heinous whisperings of the Infernal, Tolides' mind resembles a wild beast's. He is a predator well trained in the art of destruction, but a cornered animal nonetheless. From his earliest youth he was raised to regard the Church as his greatest enemy, and the idea of seeking salvation does not occur to him. Unable to depart from his nightmarish course, Tolides, just like his master before him, is likely to be Marched. Tolides' fate is tragic insofar as he, being a feral hunter rather than a sly plotter, has no real desire for power beyond what is necessary to secure his meager existence. He seeks peace and tranquility through the perfection of his art, but is unlikely to obtain either.

<span id="tolides-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Tolides at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per +1, Pre 0, Com –2, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

'''Size''': 0

'''Age''': 21 (21)

'''Decrepitude''': 0

'''Warping Score:''' 1 (0)

'''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Affinity with Perdo, See in Darkness, Lesser Immunity: Cold, Life Boost, Lightning Reflexes, Minor Magical Focus: darkness, Puissant Art: Perdo*, Quiet Magic 2x, Rapid Convalescence, Skilled Parens; Dark Secret: Diabolism, Deficient Technique: Creo; Infamous Master, Nocturnal, Lesser Malediction (Susceptibility to Sunlight), Warped Magic (darkness unfolds)

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Sinister +2, Temperate +2, Depressed +1, Emotional –1

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dagger:'' Init +1, Attack +5, Defense +3, Dam-

age +4

''Fist:'' Init +1, Attack +3, Defense +3, Damage +1

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

<span id="new-virtues-and-flaws"></span>
=== ''New Virtues and Flaws'' ===

<span id="new-virtue-see-in-darkness"></span>
= '''New Virtue: See In Darkness''' =

''Minor, Supernatural''

You can see in complete darkness much the same as those with Strong Faerie Blood. Other than that, your eyesight is not more acute than ordinary people's, and you do not see farther than normal people would see in daylight.

<span id="new-virtue-immunity-to-cold"></span>
= '''New Virtue: Immunity To Cold''' =

''Minor, Supernatural''

Normal cold does not harm you, nor does it make you feel uncomfortable. You don't need warm environments to remain healthy (see Aging in '''ArM5''', page 170). Extreme, magically created cold, such as the effect of ''Wizard's Icy Grip'' ('''ArM5''', page 142), still affects you normally.

<span id="new-flaw-susceptibility-to-sunlight"></span>
== '''New Flaw: Susceptibility To Sunlight''' ==

''Minor, Supernatural''

Direct, bright sunlight causes you noticeable pain and exhausts you. Attuned to darkness, your eyes are very sensitive, and you suffer from a –2 penalty to all rolls involving sight in bright environments such as a cloudless day. Due to your malediction, you lose one Fatigue level per Diameter if outdoors at noon on a hot summer day, and lose levels more slowly in less-intense light and warmth from the sun.

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Artes Liberales 1 (ceremonial magic), Athletics 1 (tumbling), Awareness 2 (alertness), Brawl 2 (dodge), Chirurgy 1 (treat wounds), Concentration 1 (spell casting), Dead Language: Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Finesse 1 (precision), Infernal Lore 2 (demons), Leadership 1 (intimidation), Living Language: West Slavonic 5 (curses), Magic Theory 3 (Perdo), Parma Magica 1 (Corpus), Penetration 2 (Perdo), Stealth 2 (rural areas)

'''Arts: Cr''' 0**, In** 2**, Mu** 4**, Pe** 12+3**, Re** 6**; An** 2**, Aq** 0**, Au** 0**, Co** 6**, He** 0**, Ig** 9**, Im** 3**, Me** 2**, Te** 2**, Vi** 2

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment:''' Dagger in forearm sheath, ob-

sidian pellet. '''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known:'''

''Lifting the Dangling Puppet'' (ReCo 15/+14)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+7)

''Veil of Invisibility'' (PeIm 20/+19)

''Wizard's Sidestep'' (ReIm 10/+11)

''Gloom of Evening'' (PeIg 10/+26)

''Well Without Light'' (PeIg 25/+26)

''Wizard's Icy Grip'' (PeIg 30/+26) ''Calm the Motion of the Heart'' (PeMe 15/+19)

''Stone to Dust'' (PeTe 20/+19)

'''Appearance:''' Tolides is of average size and build, with short, black hair and a pallid complexion. It is his pitch black eyes that make him distinctive, appearing to be deeply sunken, obsidian gems. People usually feel an urge to look away lest they are sucked into the bottomless void that seems to lurk behind these orbs. A long scar stretches across his throat, from one ear to the other. In the presence of other people, Tolides appears as if carved out of stone, resting still and without motion. His movements appear slow and deliberate, almost arthritic, only to strike out with catlike speed at the slightest sign of hostility. He tends to keep his hands hidden in the wide sleeves of his black robes where they rest in anticipation, a dagger prepared and ready. His posture and facial features appear elegant, but his diction and way of addressing people suggest that he has spent his whole life among the beasts of the wilderness rather than among civilized human beings. His low voice sounds raspy, and he speaks only when absolutely necessary.

'''Sigil:''' Black writhing vapor that unfolds around the caster, exaggerated by the magus' Warped Magic. Tolides' voting sigil is an obsidian wand; he keeps it with him to ensure that no one else can use it, but never uses it himself.

<span id="tolides-15-years"></span>
=== ''Tolides +15 years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per +1, Pre 0, Com –2, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1 '''Size''': 0

'''Age''': 36 (36)

'''Hierarchy Score''': 1 (''Realms of Power: The Infer-''

''nal'', page 94)

'''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3) '''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Affinity with Perdo, See in Darkness, Lesser Immunity: Cold, Life Boost, Lightning Reflexes, Minor Magical Focus: darkness, Puissant Art: Perdo*, Quiet Magic 2x, Rapid Convalescence, Skilled Parens; Dark Secret: Diabolism, Deficient Technique: Creo; Infamous Master, Nocturnal, Lesser Malediction (Susceptibility to Sunlight), Warped Magic (darkness unfolds).

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Cunning +2, Sinister +2, Temperate +2, Depressed +1, Emotional –1

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dagger:'' Init +1, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage +4

''Fist:'' Init +1, Attack +3, Defense +3, Damage +1

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Eastern Europe 1 (geography), Artes Liberales 1 (ceremonial magic), Athletics 2 (tumbling), Awareness 2 (alertness), Brawl 3 (dodge), Bargain 1 (Infernal powers), Chirurgy 2 (treat wounds), Code of Hermes 1 (Quaesitores and Hoplites), Concentration 2 (spell casting), Dead Language: Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Finesse 1 (precision), Folk Ken 1 (peasants), Hunt 1 (covering tracks), Infernal Lore 3 (demons), Leadership 1 (intimidation), Living language: East Slavonic 2 (curses), Living Language: West Slavonic 5 (curses), Magic Lore 1 (creatures), Magic Theory 4 (Perdo), Medicine 1 (anatomy), Parma Magica 3 (Corpus), Penetration 3 (Perdo), Philosophiae 1 (ritual magic), Stealth 2 (rural areas), Survival 1 (wooded mountains)

'''Equipment:''' Dagger in forearm sheath, obsidian pellet, Poniard of Deliverance, Torus of Fire Protection, Source of Tranquility.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Arts: Cr''' 0**, In** 2**, Mu** 4**, Pe** 14+3**, Re** 9**; An** 2**, Aq** 0**, Au** 0**, Co** 11**, He** 2**, Ig** 11**, Im** 5**, Me** 2**, Te** 2**, Vi** 2

'''Twilight Scars:''' none

'''Equipment''': Poniard of Deliverance, Torus of Fire Protection, Source of Tranquillity, Orb of Immanent Darkness talisman.

<span id="spells-known-7"></span>
==== '''Spells Known''': ====

''Cripple the Howling Wolf'' (PeAn 25/+21) ''Evaluate the Facing Opponent'' (InCo 10/+15) ''Track By Scent'' (MuCo(An) 4/+8) ''Chastise the Unruly Antagonist'' (PeCo 10/+30) ''Inner Darkness Unleashed'' (PeCo 20/+30) ''Lifting the Dangling Puppet'' (ReCo 15/+22) ''Retreat into the Shell of Shadow'' (ReCo 15/+22) ''Pass the Unyielding Portal'' (MuHe 5/+8) ''Gloom of Evening'' (PeIg 10/+30) ''Banishment of Warmth'' (PeIg 15/+30) ''Extinguish the Abhorrent Flame'' (PeIg 15/+30) ''Cloak of Darkness'' (PeIg 20/+30) ''Well Without Light'' (PeIg 25/+30) ''Wizard's Icy Grip'' (PeIg 30/+30) ''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+9) ''Chamber of Muffled Passing'' (PeIm 15/+24) ''Veil of Invisibility'' (PeIm 20/+24) ''Wizard's Sidestep'' (ReIm 10/+16) ''Calm the Motion of the Heart'' (PeMe 15/+21) ''Stone to Dust'' (PeTe 20/+21) ''Chastise the Unruly Fiend'' (PeVi 10/+21)

'''Appearance:''' Tolides is of average size and build, with short, black hair and a pallid complexion. It is his pitch black eyes that make him distinctive, appearing to be deeply sunken, obsidian gems. People usually feel an urge to look away lest they are sucked into the bottomless void that seems to lurk behind these orbs. A long scar stretches across his throat, from one ear to the other. In the presence of other people, Tolides appears as if carved out of stone, resting still and without motion. His movements appear slow and deliberate, almost arthritic, only to strike out with cat-like speed at the slightest sign of hostility. He tends to keep his hands hidden in the wide sleeves of his black robes where they rest in anticipation, a dagger prepared and ready. His posture and facial features appear elegant, but his diction and way of addressing people suggest that he has spent his whole life among the beasts of the wilderness rather than among civilized human beings. His low voice sounds raspy, and he speaks only when absolutely necessary.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' While trying to survive in the harsh environment of Eastern Europe, Tolides acquired many practical skills. He gained 180 experience points in Abilities, and 120 experience in Arts in total. In 20 seasons in the lab, he learned and developed new spells and items that helped him to further his various goals. Of the items he enchanted, two were given away in exchange for favors he received in return. One of the beneficiaries helped him with his longev-

<span id="magi-of-hermes-66"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

ity ritual, an endeavor that took him one of his Lab seasons. He also enchanted and attuned his talisman.

<span id="tolides-30-years"></span>
=== ''Tolides +30 years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per +1, Pre 0, Com –2, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

'''Size''': 0 '''Age''': 51 (42) '''Decrepitude''': 0 '''Warping Score''': 5 (6) '''Hierarchy Score''': 3 '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Affinity with Perdo, See in Darkness, Lesser Immunity: Cold, Life Boost, Lightning Reflexes, Minor Magical Focus: darkness, Puissant Art: Perdo*, Quiet Magic 2x, Rapid Convalescence, Skilled Parens; Dark Secret: Diabolism, Deficient Technique: Creo; Infamous Master, Nocturnal, Lesser Malediction (Susceptibility to Sunlight), Warped Magic (darkness unfolds).

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Cunning +2, Sinister +3, Temperate +2, Depressed +1, Emotional –1

'''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dagger:'' Init +1, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage +4

''Fist:'' Init +1, Attack +3, Defense +3, Damage +1

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Eastern Europe 2 (geography), Artes Liberales 1 (ceremonial magic), Athletics 2 (tumbling), Awareness 2 (alertness), Brawl 3 (dodge), Bargain 2 (Infernal powers), Chirurgy 2 (treat wounds), Code of Hermes 1 (Quaesitores and Hoplites), Concentration 3 (spell casting), Dead Language: Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Divine Lore 1 (Divine creatures), Finesse 1 (precision), Folk Ken 1 (peasants), Hunt 2 (covering tracks), Infernal Lore 3 (demons), Leadership 1 (intimidation), Living language: East Slavonic 2 (curses), Living Language: West Slavonic 5 (curses), Magic Lore 1 (creatures), Magic Theory 5 (Perdo), Medicine 1 (anatomy), Parma Magica 4 (Corpus), Penetration 4 (Perdo), Philosophiae 1 (ritual magic), Stealth 2 (rural areas), Survival 1 (wooded mountains), True Name of Balthazar 1 (''Realms of Power: The Infernal'', page 34)

'''Arts: Cr''' 0**, In** 2**, Mu** 4**, Pe** 17+3**, Re** 9**; An** 2**, Aq** 2**, Au** 3**, Co** 11**, He** 2**, Ig** 14**, Im** 5**, Me** 2**, Te** 8**, Vi** 5

'''Twilight Scars:''' The intensity of light in locations in which he stays for longer than two minutes appears as if slightly faded; the light returns to its full intensity once he has left.

'''Equipment:''' Dagger in forearm sheath, obsidian pellet, Poniard of Deliverance, Torus of Fire Protection, Source of Tranquillity, Orb of Immanent Darkness talisman.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0) '''Spells Known''':

''Cripple the Howling Wolf'' (PeAn 25/+21) ''Evaluate the Facing Opponent'' (InCo 10/+15) ''Track By Scent'' (MuCo(An) 4/+8) ''Chastise the Unruly Antagonist'' (PeCo 10/+33)

''Inner Darkness Unleashed'' (PeCo 20/+33): Mastery 1 (Magic Resistance)

''Blind the Insurgent Pack'' (PeCo 25/+33) ''Lifting the Dangling Puppet'' (ReCo 15/+22) ''Retreat into the Shell of Shadow'' (ReCo 15/+22): Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

''The Protesting Adversary Held Still'' (ReCo 20/+22)

''Pass the Unyielding Portal'' (MuHe 5/+8)

''Gloom of Evening'' (PeIg 10/+36) ''Banishment of Warmth'' (PeIg 15/+36)

''Extinguish the Abhorrent Flame'' (PeIg 15/+36)

''Cloak of Darkness'' (PeIg 20/+36) ''Orb of Darkness'' (PeIg 20/+36)

''Abyssal Touch'' (PeIg 25/+36)

''Well Without Light'' (PeIg 25/+36)

''Wizard's Icy Grip'' (PeIg 30/+36): Mastery 1 (Magic Resistance)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+9)

''Chamber of Muffled Passing'' (PeIm 15/+27)

''Veil of Invisibility'' (PeIm 20/+27)

Wizard's Sidestep (ReIm 10/+16)

''Calm the Motion of the Heart'' (PeMe 15/+24): Mastery 1 (Still Casting)]

''Stone to Dust'' (PeTe 20/+30): Mastery 1 (Multiple Casting)

''End of the Mighty Castle'' (PeTe 25/+30)

''Hands of the Grasping Earth'' (Re(Mu)Te 15/+14) ''Belittle the Ferocious Warlock'' (PeVi 20/+27)

''Chastise the Unruly Fiend'' (PeVi 10/+27)

''Circular Ward Against Demons'' (ReVi 20/+16)

'''Appearance:''' Tolides is of average size and build, with short, black hair and a pallid complexion. It is his pitch black eyes that make him distinctive, appearing to be deeply sunken, obsidian gems. People usually feel an urge to look away lest they are sucked into the bottomless void that seems to lurk behind these orbs. A long scar stretches across his throat, from one

ear to the other. In the presence of other people, Tolides appears as if carved out of stone, resting still and without motion. His movements appear slow and deliberate, almost arthritic, only to strike out with cat-like speed at the slightest sign

<span id="magi-of-hermes-67"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

of hostility. He tends to keep his hands hidden in the wide sleeves of his black robes where they rest in anticipation, a dagger prepared and ready. His posture and facial features appear elegant, but his diction and way of addressing people suggest that he has spent his whole life among the beasts of the wilderness rather than among civilized human beings. His low voice sounds raspy, and he speaks only when absolutely necessary.

'''Activities in the last 15 years:''' Tolides gained Abilities worth 140 experience points, and Arts worth 160 experience. He spent 25 experience on mastering spells, and 5 experience on learning the True Name of a demon. He was approached by his familiar-to-be, and bonded it. His dealings with the Infernal were discovered, and he was Marched. Having successfully fled the assault of the Order, probably with Infernal assistance, he searched for and found a place with a stronger aura (level 4) that he made his new residence. He spent one season preparing his new laboratory. In total, he spent 16 seasons performing lab work. Due to his dealings with the Infernal, and spending a lot of time in and exposed to Infernal auras, Tolides gained a considerable amount of Warping.

<span id="familiar-an-imp"></span>
=== ''Familiar: An Imp'' ===

'''Order:''' Tempters (Maligenii) '''Infernal Might:''' 10 (Vim)

'''Characteristics:''' Int 0, Per +4, Pre –3, Com –1, Str –5, Sta 0, Dex +2, Qik +5

'''Size:''' –5

'''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' Keen Vision, Sharp Ears; Greedy, Nocturnal

'''Personality Traits:''' Cruel +2, Brave –2, Enduring –1, Insidious +3, Sneaking +3

'''Hierarchy:''' 0

'''Combat:'''

''Bite:'' Init +5, Attack +3, Defense +14, Damage –12

'''Soak:''' 0

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1), –3 (2), –5 (3), Incapacitated (4)

'''Abilities''': Athletics 1 (contortions), Awareness 5 (keeping watch), Bargain 1 (bonds), Guile 2 (other demons), Hunt 3 (covering tracks), Stealth (shadowing) 5

<span id="powers-6"></span>
==== '''Powers:''' ====

''Coagulation'', 1 point, Init –1, Corpus (''Realms of Power: The Infernal'', page 31)

''Obsession'', 1 to 3 points, Init –5, Vim: Hopelessness (''Realms of Power: The Infernal'', page 31)

''Petrification'', 1 point, Init –10, Corpus. The imp transforms its body into solid material, and slightly increases its weight. If lifted and touched in that form, it behaves and feels like a small figurine made of stone. While petrified, the gargoyle-like imp is unable to move, but can end its stasis at any time, or become incorporeal by dropping its ''Coagulation.'' It can slowly move its eyes to survey its surroundings, and anyone deliberately watching it doing so will notice it, if he succeeds at a Perception + Awareness roll against an Ease Factor of 6.

''See in Darkness'', 0 points, Init n/a. Like Tolides, the imp is able to see in complete darkness. Unlike him, it is not affected by sunlight unless at noontime (see Weakness).

''Source of Tranquility'', 3 points, Init 0, Ignem. The imp can evoke an effect that is similar to the one provided by Tolides' enchanted item of the same name, but with Duration Diameter only.

'''Weakness:''' The imp is unable to use any of its powers during noontime; that is, the Diameter around midday. When exposed to direct sunlight during that time, it automatically assumes the form described in ''Petrification'', and can not change back until dusk.

'''Vis:''' 2 pawns of Vim, in its wings

'''Appearance:''' The imp appears as a vaguely humanoid creature of about the size of a small kitten. Two leathery wings spring from its back that enable it to fly and hover about. The fiend's naked skin is a dirty, reddish gray, and feels cool to the touch. Its limbs end in wicked claws that are too small to effectively harm a human, but that greedily grab for small donations it is offered. Proffered food is quickly devoured with its wide, fanged maw. Like a cat, the gaze of its dark eyes constantly darts around, detecting the slightest movement.

One day, Tolides is approached by an imp — a lesser demon — that offers to watch his back while he pursues his studies, asking little in return. This incident, though not particularly improbable for someone who occasionally deals with the Infernal, is unlikely to be completely coincidental. The Infernal Realm is not renowned for its benevolence or generosity. Being able to survey and, if necessary, to manipulate a precious pawn first hand is too valuable a chance for the Infernal powers to let slip, especially if it helps to strengthen the mutual bond.

Tolides binds the imp that, like him, is primarily a creature of darkness, by calling upon his Perdo Ignem Lab Total. He establishes a Gold and Silver Cord of score 1 each, and a Bronze Cord of score 3.

<span id="tolides-33-years"></span>
=== ''Tolides +33 years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per +1, Pre 0, Com –2, Str +1, Sta +2, Dex +1, Qik +1

'''Size''': 0

'''Age''': 54 (43) '''Decrepitude''': 0

'''Warping Score''': 5 (12) '''Hierarchy Score''': 4 '''Confidence Score:''' 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws:''' The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Affinity with Perdo, See in Darkness, Lesser Immunity: Cold, Life Boost, Lightning Reflexes, Minor Magical Focus: darkness, Puissant Art: Perdo*, Quiet Magic 2x, Rapid Convalescence, Skilled Parens; Dark Secret: Diabolism, Deficient Technique: Creo; Infamous Master, Nocturnal, Lesser Malediction (Susceptibility to Sunlight), Warped Magic (darkness unfolds).

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits:''' Cunning +2, Sinister +3, Temperate +2, Depressed +1, Emotional –1 '''Reputations:''' none

'''Combat:'''

''Dagger:'' Init +1, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage +4

''Fist:'' Init +1, Attack +3, Defense +3, Damage +1

'''Soak:''' +2

'''Fatigue Levels:''' OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities:''' Area Lore: Eastern Europe 2 (geography), Artes Liberales 1 (ceremonial magic), Athletics 2 (tumbling), Awareness 2 (alertness), Brawl 3 (dodge), Bargain 2 (Infernal powers), Chirurgy 2 (treat wounds), Code of Hermes 1 (Quaesitores and Hoplites), Concentration 3 (spell casting), Dead Language: Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Divine Lore 1 (Divine creatures), Finesse 1 (precision), Folk Ken 1 (peasants), Hunt 2 (covering tracks), Infernal Lore 3 (demons), Leadership 1 (intimidation), Living language: East Slavonic 2 (curses), Living Language: West Slavonic 5 (curses), Magic Lore 1 (creatures), Magic Theory 5 (Perdo), Medicine 1 (anatomy), Parma Magica 4 (Corpus), Penetration 4 (Perdo), Philosophiae 1 (ritual magic), Stealth 2 (rural areas), Survival 1 (wooded mountains), True Name of Balthazar 1, True Name of Ilkazar 1

'''Arts: Cr''' 0**, In** 2**, Mu** 4**, Pe** 17+3**, Re** 10**; An** 2**, Aq** 2**, Au** 3**, Co** 11**, He** 2**, Ig** 14**, Im** 5**, Me** 2**, Te** 8**, Vi** 5

'''Twilight Scars:''' The intensity of light in locations in which he stays for longer than two minutes appears as if slightly faded; the light returns to its full intensity once he has left. In Tolides's presence, small flames flicker slightly as if caressed by a chilling breeze, threatening to go out.

'''Equipment:''' Dagger in forearm sheath, obsidian pellet, Poniard of Deliverance, Torus of Fire Protection, Source of Tranquillity, Orb of Immanent Darkness talisman.

'''Encumbrance:''' 0 (0)

'''Spells Known''':

''Cripple the Howling Wolf'' (PeAn 25/+21) ''Evaluate the Facing Opponent'' (InCo 10/+15)

''Track By Scent'' (MuCo(An) 5/+8)

''Chastise the Unruly Antagonist'' (PeCo 10/+33) ''Inner Darkness Unleashed'' (PeCo 20/+33): Mas-

tery 1 (Magic Resistance)

''Blind the Insurgent Pack'' (PeCo 25/+33) ''Lifting the Dangling Puppet'' (ReCo 15/+23)

''Retreat into the Shell of Shadow'' (ReCo 15/+23):

Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

''The Protesting Adversary Held Still'' (ReCo 20/+23)

''Pass the Unyielding Portal'' (MuHe 5/+8) ''Gloom of Evening'' (PeIg 10/+36)

''Banishment of Warmth'' (PeIg 15/+36)

''Extinguish the Abhorrent Flame'' (PeIg 15/+36)

''Cloak of Darkness'' (PeIg 20/+36)

''Orb of Darkness'' (PeIg 20/+36)

''Abyssal Touch'' (PeIg 25/+36)

''Well Without Light'' (PeIg 25/+36)

''Wizard's Icy Grip'' (PeIg 30/+36): Mastery 1

(Magic Resistance)

''Domain of Darkness'' (PeIg 45/+36)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-68"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+9)

''Chamber of Muffled Passing'' (PeIm 15/+27)

''Veil of Invisibility'' (PeIm 20/+27)

''Wizard's Sidestep'' (ReIm 10/+17)

''Calm the Motion of the Heart'' (PeMe 15/+24): Mastery 1 (Still Casting)

''Stone to Dust'' (PeTe 20/+30): Mastery 1 (Multiple Casting)

''End of the Mighty Castle'' (PeTe 25/+30)

''Hands of the Grasping Earth'' (Re(Mu)Te 15/+15)

''Chastise the Unruly Fiend'' (PeVi 10/+27) ''Belittle the Ferocious Warlock'' (PeVi 20/+27): Mas-

tery 2 (Fast Casting, Magic Resistance)

''Circular Ward Against Demons'' (ReVi 20/+17)

'''Appearance:''' Tolides is of average size and build, with short, black hair and a pallid complexion. It is his pitch black eyes that make him distinctive, appearing to be deeply sunken, obsidian gems. People usually feel an urge to look away lest they are sucked into the bottomless void that seems to lurk behind these orbs. A long scar stretches across his throat, from one ear to the other. In the presence of other people, Tolides appears as if carved out of stone, resting still and without motion. His movements appear slow and deliberate, almost arthritic, only to strike out with catlike speed at the slightest sign of hostility. He tends to keep his hands hidden in the wide sleeves of his black robes where they rest in anticipation, a dagger prepared and ready. His posture and facial features appear elegant, but his diction and way of addressing people suggest that he has spent his whole life among the beasts of the wilderness rather than among civilized human beings. His low voice sounds raspy, and he speaks only when absolutely necessary.

'''Activities in the last 3 years:''' Tolides spent three seasons developing his greatest achievement, the spell ''Domain of Darkness''. Spending almost an entire three years in his lab, he learned another True Name of a demon, and fine-tuned his battery of spells to stand prepared against the continuous threat of being discovered and slain by the Hoplites of the Order.

<span id="new-spells-11"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Most spells and enchantments that Tolides invented over the described period of time are supposed to further his goal to rid the world around him of light and warmth, to make it more bearable for him. Most of his creations are influenced by gloom and decay, reflecting their creator's view of the world.

<span id="corpus-spells-8"></span>
=== ''Corpus Spells'' ===

<span id="track-by-scent"></span>
=== '''Track By Scent''' ===

MuCo(An) 4

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

For the duration of the spell, the caster's sense of smell is as sensitive as a staghound's.

Being a hunter through-and-through, Tolides frequently employs this spell to track down those who try to escape the punishment he has decided to deal them.

(Base 2, +2 Sun, requisite free)

<span id="evaluate-the-facing-opponent"></span>
=== '''Evaluate the Facing Opponent''' ===

InCo 10

R: Eye, D: Mom, T: Ind

Looking the target in the eye, the caster is able to sense any corporal affliction or ailment that might hamper the target's physical movement. This includes, for example, injuries, fractures, and crippled limbs covered by clothes or armor. Note that the caster must face the target directly to scrutinize his or her physical condition.

When Tolides developed this spell he did not own a mirror, but seriously considered acquiring one to extend the utility of the spell to diagnosing himself.

(Base 5, +1 Eye)

<span id="chastise-the-unruly-antagonist"></span>
= '''Chastise the Unruly Antagonist''' =

PeCo 10

R: Eye, D: Conc, T: Ind

The target is overcome by intense pain. If the target tries to engage in activities that require concentration while under the effect of this spell, a successful Concentration roll against an Ease Factor of 9 is required ('''ArM5''', page 82). The dreadful effect of punishment lasts as long as the caster concentrates.

In Tolides' version of this spell, it appears as if the victim is wrapped in bands of darkness that tear at his flesh.

(Base 4, +1 Eye, +1 Conc)

<span id="retreat-into-the-shell-of-shadow"></span>
= '''Retreat Into the Shell of Shadow''' =

ReCo 15

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Ind

The caster instantly transports himself to any location he can see, not more than 50 paces distant. A puff of black, quickly dis-

solving vapor is all that is left behind once the caster vanishes and reappears at the destination. If the initial point or endpoint of the leap is Warded, or if the caster's magic is resisted, that resistance must be overcome much the same as when targeting a Warded area (see ''Aegis of the Hearth'', '''ArM5''', page 161).

Tolides developed this spell to retreat into the shadow of a dark corner. If the endpoint of the transportation is exposed to unclouded daylight, Tolides must make a Concentration roll against an Ease Factor of 9 to gracefully reach his destination. A failure usually means that he tumbles and falls, is disorientated, or is enfeebled, whereas a botch calls for more-dramatic results to reflect his malediction. Note that this quirk is not a flaw of the spell, but an effect of Tolides' Susceptibility to Sunlight.

(Base 15)

<span id="inner-darkness-unleashed"></span>
==== '''Inner Darkness Unleashed''' ====

PeCo 20

R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Ind

The effect of this spell is similar to ''The Wound That Weeps'' ('''ArM5''', page 133), though its cosmetic component and modified Range

<span id="magi-of-hermes-69"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

make it appear somewhat differently.

A wound opens on the body of the affected target, releasing black, oozing liquid similar to oil or tar. As it flows, the black substance is gradually replaced by the victim's normal blood flow, effectively creating a Light Wound.

(Base 5, +3 Sight, free cosmetic effect)

<span id="the-protesting-adversary-held-still"></span>
= '''The Protesting Adversary Held Still''' =

ReCo 20

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

The affected target is held fast and still for as long as the caster concentrates. Being held means that the target is unable to move his body, including his limbs, fingers, eyes, and lips. A magus who tries to cast spells while under the effect of this spell is likely to be subject to a penalty to his casting total, unless the intended magical effect does not require words and gestures ('''ArM5''', page 83).

In Tolides' version of this spell, small ripples of darkness quiver over the body of the target that seem to function as ropes, holding his victim in place.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

<span id="blind-the-insurgent-pack"></span>
=== '''Blind the Insurgent Pack''' ===

PeCo 25

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Group

Black, oily tears appear in the eyes of all individuals of the affected Group, burning and blurring their vision. With their eyesight blurred, and all sources of light reduced to unrecognizable sparkles, affected targets are considerably hindered while performing actions that depend on eyesight. They are subject to a –3 penalty to all rolls that involve sight (see Poor Eyesight Flaw, '''ArM5''', page 58). If left to themselves, the victims' blurred vision heals as a Light Wound.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +2 Group, free cosmetic effect)

<span id="ignem-spells-6"></span>
=== ''Ignem Spells'' ===

<span id="banishment-of-warmth"></span>
=== '''Banishment of Warmth''' ===

PeIg 15

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

This practical spell expels the warmth from all items that have been set up inside the affected Circle. Lowering the temperature of the Circle to slightly above freezing, ''Banishment of Warmth'' can be used to prevent goods related to Animal, Herbam, or Corpus from decaying naturally for a couple of days. The spell is not designed as an offensive weapon, but living creatures that remain in the Circle for an extended period of time do start losing Fatigue due to the cold. Note that the spell must be cast after the targets have been set up inside the Circle; it does not affect items that are placed into the Circle once the spell has been cast. A closer look at the enchanted Circle reveals a translucent waft of vapor over the affected area.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Ring, free cosmetic effect)

<span id="extinguish-the-abhorrent-flame"></span>
= '''Extinguish the Abhorrent Flame''' =

PeIg 15

R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Ind

This spell instantly extinguishes any individual fire up to the size of a campfire. The extinguished fire can be relit by mundane or magical means, but does not relight by itself.

To feel comfortable, Tolides shuns the heat and light of fires almost as much as he avoids

sunlight, and he uses this spell to extinguish flames even from afar. It also comes in handy for affecting the sources of light of those who depend on flames to see in the dark.

(Base 4, +3 Sight)

<span id="cloak-of-darkness"></span>
==== '''Cloak of Darkness''' ====

PeIg 20

R: Sight, D: Diam, T: Part

All light around the head of the target is completely extinguished, leaving the victim mobile and unhampered, but engulfed in a tight-fitting cloak of darkness — an aurora of opaque, black flame that moves with the target for the duration of the spell. The target is blind, unless affected by a spell that permits the caster to see in complete darkness, such as ''Eyes of the Bat''.

(Base 3, +3 Sight, +1 Diam, +1 Part, free cosmetic effect)

<span id="orb-of-darkness"></span>
=== '''Orb of Darkness''' ===

PeIg 20

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Part

This spell represents a larger variant of the ''Cloak of Darkness'', and removes all light from the designated target area. The effect manifests in the form of a irregular sphere of writhing darkness that contains everything within three paces of the affected target. Anyone inside the affected space is effectively blind. To see through the area from either side, a spell that permits the target to see in complete darkness, like ''Eyes of the Bat'', is required.

The spell must be targeted at an object, individual, or other specific point in space. This location functions as a focus for the effect only, as the spell targets the light within the Part of space surrounding the focus, rather than the focus itself. Thus, the spell does not have to penetrate the Magic Resistance of anyone inside the target area, but only the resistance of the focus. If it fails to penetrate, the spell fails. If the focus is an individual or object that moves, the created darkness moves along with it. For example, if the spell is cast on a pebble, and that pebble is thrown into a lake, the blob of darkness will sink to the bottom.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Diam, +1 Part, +1 Size)

<span id="abyssal-touch"></span>
==== '''Abyssal Touch''' ====

PeIg 25 R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Group

<span id="magi-of-hermes-70"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

For two minutes, all members of the affected Group are thoroughly chilled. Living targets lose one Fatigue level per round until they fall unconscious, while objects are considered frozen. The chill does not persist long enough to actually damage living targets.

In Tolides' version of this spell, dark vapor emerges from the ground near the designated Group and engulfs the affected targets. The apparition does not physically constrict the victims, and does not block their senses, but keeps chilling them for the duration of the spell.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +1 Diam, +2 Group)

<span id="domain-of-darkness"></span>
==== '''Domain of Darkness''' ====

PeIg 45

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Bound, Ritual

This ritual creates a domain of darkness in the designated Boundary, which can cover an area with a diameter of nearly 1000 paces. No natural light that is brighter than a soft evening glow is ever shed within its Boundary, regardless of the season or time of day. Due to the continuous lack of sun, the whole area becomes cold and uncomfortable for living beings. Warm air from outside is not actively resisted, but almost never reaches the center of the domain. Even fires created by mundane or magical means appear weak, and only dimly lit. Plants within the Boundary turn to leafless caricatures of life sooner or later. Note that a Boundary requires a well-defined border, such as the tree line of a grove, the cliffs of a steep valley, or the shore of an island.

A brief note on the specific use of this spell that should not to be mistaken for traits or side-effects of the spell itself: The area affected by ''Domain of Darkness'' provides a haven for all creatures that shun the light. It represents Tolides' latest attempt to establish some sort of abode in a domain of his own. Because the affected Boundary is inhabited by a practicing diabolist, and the ritual needed to cast the spell is often powered by Infernal vis, the aura of the Boundary slowly but steadily accumulates more and more traits of Infernal Warping. For example, animals that stay inside the domain for an extended period of time are likely to turn into Corrupted Beasts — repellent aberrations of nature (''Realms of Power: The Infernal'', page 77). One day, the affected Boundary might even become a regio of its own, which is exactly what Tolides has planned.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +4 Year, +4 Boundary, +2 Size)

<span id="imaginem-spells-6"></span>
=== ''Imaginem Spells'' ===

<span id="chamber-of-muffled-passing"></span>
=== '''Chamber of Muffled Passing''' ===

PeIm 15

R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Room

For the duration of two minutes, all sound inside the affected Room, regardless of its origin and volume, is completely muted. The spell affects mundane actions, such as creaking floor boards or shouting, in much the same way as spell casting that requires a voice.

Due to his Quiet Magic, this limitation doesn't impair Tolides much, unless he wants to cast an additional spell with Range Voice while inside the Room, or to affect a target across the threshold. In Tolides' version of the spell, the affected Room is slightly tainted by darkness. Semi-translucent patches of murk slowly crawl along the walls of the Room, greedily devouring all sound from within or outside. Tolides is not very creative when it comes to finding names for his creations, and doesn't care much about the ambiguous name of this spell that also describes the silenced deaths of those in the chamber whom Tolides decides to kill.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Diam, +2 Room)

<span id="vim-spells-4"></span>
=== ''Vim Spells'' ===

<span id="chastise-the-unruly-fiend"></span>
==== '''Chastise the Unruly Fiend''' ====

PeVi 10

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

The effect of this reinvented spell is practically equivalent to ''The Demon's Eternal Oblivion'', though its cosmetic component makes it appear somewhat differently.

A black tentacle, similar to a writhing whip, lashes out from the caster's palm to hit the targeted Infernal creature, reducing its Infernal Might score by 10 points. Brought close to destruction, a demon can be punished, and forced to obey, or at least to take the caster seriously. Note that the caster must be able to perceive or sense a demon to target it, and the spell must penetrate its Magic Resistance to take effect.

(Base effect, +2 Voice, free cosmetic effect)

PeVi 20

R: Sight, D: Diam, T: Ind

Upon penetrating the Magic Resistance of the target, the spell reduces the casting total of the affected victim by 5 levels. The evocation does not hinder the movement or senses of the target in any way, but merely affects all magic that is cast. Note that this spell must be fast cast if it is supposed to take effect before the opponent can act in the first round. (See '''ArM5''', pages 83 and 87.)

In Tolides' version of the spell, it appears as if the target is trapped in a dark cocoon of semi-transparent, wildly writhing vapor.

(Base effect (4), +3 Sight, +1 Diam)

<span id="enchanted-items-12"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Tolides has created the following items.

<span id="arrows-of-defeat"></span>
=== ''Arrows of Defeat'' ===

Tolides created a set of enchanted arrows for a shady noble who had reason to fear his opponent's cavalry's strength in battle, and was pleased to learn about an effective means to counter this threat on the field. The arrows have been specifically designed to cover long distances, instead of featuring armor piercing or superior damage qualities. In the hands of an expert archer, and aimed at the ground right in front of the foremost rider, even a single well-placed arrow deals considerable damage to a small galloping army that is not quick enough to avoid the pit that seems to come from nowhere.

The Lab Total used for this enchantment is 40, and thus yields six charges that Tolides distributes among six identical arrows with one charge each. As a set of charged items, the enchantment did not cost him any vis.

<span id="gaping-maw-of-the-bottomless-pit"></span>
= '''Gaping Maw of the Bottomless Pit''' =

PeTe 10

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Part

The magical effect of the enchanted arrows is equivalent to the spell ''Pit of Gaping'' ''Earth'' ('''ArM5''', page 155), but operates at Range Touch instead of Voice. Consequently, each arrow, being a carrier for the spell, must be aimed and fired to reach its target, because the arrows themselves do not have any supernatural flight qualities. After leaving the string of the bow used to propel it forward, and upon touching solid, earthen ground, each of the enchanted arrows destroys earth as described for ''Pit of Gaping Earth''.

<span id="magical-weapons"></span>
=== ''Magical Weapons'' ===

Enchanted weapons based on PeCo that affect a target at Range Touch must hit the opponent to take effect; that is, they require a positive Attack Advantage. Armor made from Terram or Animal does not prevent damage caused by a Corpus effect per se, so the attack need not successfully deal damage. All mundane properties and statistics of a magical weapon apply normally, unless the weapon does not penetrate the Magic Resistance of the target ('''ArM5''', page 85), in which case the weapon has no effect.

As a typical trait of one of Tolides' creations, black vapor eerily emerges from the bottom of the created pit and dissolves harmlessly into the surrounding environment.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Part, +1 size, free cosmetic effect)

<span id="torus-of-fire-protection"></span>
=== ''Torus of Fire Protection'' ===

An inconspicuous pendant, this enchanted item comes in the form of a small, brown torus made of fired clay. For Tolides, it serves as a constant means of protection against fire as long as the size of the threat does not exceed the size of a campfire.

The Lab Total used to create this Lesser Enchantment includes a +4 material bonus for protection from fire for fired clay, and +4 for knowing ''Extinguish the Abhorrent Flame'', a similar spell. The enchantment cost two pawns of vis.

<span id="quench-the-open-fire"></span>
=== '''Quench the Open Fire''' ===

PeIg 15 Pen +0, unlimited uses R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Small mundane fires that come into contact with the item are extinguished, as are magical flames that do not exceed +5 damage. Because it is the enchanted item that must be bathed in flames to extinguish a fire, and not the person who wears it, the pendant should be worn on top of the user's clothes, and not underneath.

(Effect: Base 4, +1 Touch; +10 unlimited uses)

<span id="poniard-of-deliverance"></span>
=== ''Poniard of Deliverance'' ===

Tolides deployed an almost-identical dagger during his apprenticeship, but that weapon was confiscated by the Quaesitores at the time he turned in his former master. It had to be reconstructed from scratch by the now-ownerless magus. Although Tolides usually shuns open combat as worthy only of fools, he sometimes still succumbs to his predatory nature, and makes use of melee weapons instead of ranged magic to deal with an opponent face to face.

The Lab Total used to create this Lesser Enchantment includes a +2 shape bonus for Precise Destruction for daggers. It cost two pawns of vis to create.

<span id="appliance-of-wrath"></span>
==== '''Appliance of Wrath''' ====

PeCo 20

Pen +10, 24/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

When activated by quickly flicking it in the wielder's wrist, this dagger works as a medium for the embedded spell of destruction. Upon touching its target, the narrow blade deals a Light Wound in addition to any damage that is caused by the physical aspect of the weapon.

(Effect: Base 5, +1 Touch; +5 penetration, +5 24/day)

<span id="sting-of-the-viper"></span>
=== ''Sting of the Viper'' ===

When Tolides fell victim to the alluring charm of a salacious creature, he agreed to protect her against her numerous enemies in return for a multitude of other services. His present for her came in the form of an ornate, nicely crafted hair pin of considerable size that is usually worn in combination with an equally impressive comb to hold and accentuate long, dark hair. The

comb and the handle of the pin appear to be made from ivory, but in fact are carved from human bone, while the needle blade is made from the finest steel. Not designed for open combat, the pin is light and swift, and fits perfectly into small, slender hands to serve as a tool for the art of assassination. It can only be used by the person for whom it was designed.

The Lab Total used to create this Lesser Enchantment includes a +3 shape bonus for Assassination for daggers. It cost two pawns of vis to create.

<span id="the-fools-fate"></span>
=== '''The Fool's Fate''' ===

PeCo 20

Pen +0, 3/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

When the pin is driven into the flesh of the target, black ripples spread from the puncture and run along the victim's body, thereby causing a Medium Wound. The artifact does not include any Penetration, and is thus not of much use against targets with Magic Resistance.

(Effect: Base 10, +1 Touch, free cosmetic effect; +3 effect use, +2 3/day)

<span id="source-of-tranquillity"></span>
=== ''Source of Tranquillity'' ===

The Lab Total used to create this Lesser Enchantment includes a +5 material bonus for darkness granted for items made of obsidian stone, and +5 for knowing ''Well Without Light'', a similar spell. The creation cost three pawns of vis.

<span id="chamber-of-void"></span>
==== '''Chamber of Void''' ====

PeIg 24

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Constant, T: Room

This enchantment is instilled in a tiny, obsidian figurine that resembles an ugly humanoid with folded wings. The effect of the enchantment completely and entirely extinguishes all light in the Room it is placed into for as long as the item remains in it. All perception based on vision is effectively impossible, unless the occupant is able to see in complete darkness. If the item is moved to a new room, the effect is transferred to that room. If the figurine is not in a room, or is in a room too large for it to affect, the effect is temporarily suppressed.

(Effect: Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun; +2 Room; +1 2/day, +3 environmental trigger)

<span id="rod-of-mutilation"></span>
=== ''Rod of Mutilation'' ===

Tolides enchanted this rod for a diabolist in exchange for services received, one of which was the beneficiary's aid with a non-Hermetic variant of his longevity ritual, an endeavor the magus could not have undertaken on his own due to his deficiency in the Art of Creo. The item is a wand carved from human bone, shod in iron for better durability. It clearly bears the marks of its maker: the embedded destructive energy pulses in the form of vibrant darkness whenever the rod is used to hit a target.

The Lab Total used to create this invested item includes a +4 material bonus for destroying the human body with an object made of human bone, and a multiplier of 5 due to effect expiration after seven years. A small item made of bone, the rod was opened with six pawns of vis, and invested with four pawns-worth of effects.

<span id="crush-the-adversarys-limb"></span>
==== '''Crush the Adversary's Limb''' ====

PeCo 33

Pen +10, 6/day

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This item can be used six times per day, for seven years after the first use.

After activating the item by bouncing it longitudinally and successfully hitting a human target, the rod cripples the touched limb of that target. The affected limb appears as if crushed by black patches of darkness that ripple along it, and that dissipate as soon as the body part is broken and rendered useless.

The victim of a broken leg is considered to suffer from the Lame Flaw ('''ArM5''', page 55), while two broken legs effectively Cripple ('''ArM5''', page 52) a person. One or two broken hands are equivalent to Missing Hand ('''ArM5''', page 56), or No Hands ('''ArM5''', page 56), respectively. Limbs damaged by the rod heal as a Medium Wound.

(Effect: Base 15, +1 Touch, +1 Part, free cosmetic effect; +5 penetration, +3 6/day)

<span id="talisman-orb-of-immanent-darkness"></span>
= ''Talisman: Orb of Immanent Darkness'' =

Tolides' talisman is a black obsidian orb. He has treasured the dark stone for as long as he can remember, mostly for its cool touch and the soothing of pain it seems to provide him. Still, it took him time and effort to collect enough knowledge and resources to undertake its attunement to the aspect of darkness.

The orb is Tolides' desperate attempt to counter the painful effect of his Susceptibility to Sunlight. His spell does not completely offset the effect of sunlight, but it at least softens some of the penalties he would suffer without this means of protection. While in possession of the item, Tolides can walk cloaked and hooded below the open daytime sky without suffering from loss of Fatigue. The murk created by the enchanted item does not spread further than the rim of his hood and sleeves, and looking around over a sunny landscape bathed in sunlight still causes him pain. Attentive bystanders see a deep, preternatural shadow under his hood, and with his obsidian eyes bereft of any reflection, there are no recognizable contours left under the black linen cloth.

The Lab Total used for the instilled effect benefits from the +5 material bonus for darkness provided by obsidian, as well as from +2 for knowing ''Gloom of the Evening'', a similar spell. Finally, the Lab Total gets +5 for the enchanter's close connection to the talisman. It cost Tolides two pawns of vis to instill the effect, in addition to the four pawns required to open the item for enchantment.

<span id="attunements-5"></span>
==== '''Attunements''' ====

+5 to spellcasting involving light's absence

<span id="soothing-shadows"></span>
==== '''Soothing Shadows''' ====

PeIg 14

Pen +0, constant effect

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

This item provides a constant effect.

The intensity of light close to the head and upper part of the body of the person who carries the enchanted item is greatly reduced. It appears as if deep shadows are cast upon the bearer. A closer look will reveal an unnatural lack of light.

(Effect: Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part; +3 environmental trigger, +1 2/day)

<span id="chapter-fifteen"></span>
=== ''Chapter Fifteen'' ===

<span id="yestin-of-jerbiton"></span>
= ''Yestin of Jerbiton'' =

'''Concept:''' A traveling bard, whose magic enhances his music and makes his journeys easier, even as he's plagued by a meddlesome faerie.

Yestin Ap Llewelyn of Jerbiton is an impressionable dreamer, an idealist always believing that something more adventurous lies just beyond his grasp. He travels widely and takes his music and magic all across Europe. He is a naturally upbeat man who enjoys the company of others. Feeling equally honored to play for prince, magus, or peasant alike, he is sure to strike up friendships wherever he goes. It may have been these qualities that drew the faerie spirit Taliesin to him, and it is certainly these qualities that Taliesin exploits to his own ends. Under Taliesin's guidance, Yestin frequently finds himself embroiled in some mystery, seeking to put right the wrongs suffered by others. In return, Taliesin has promised to one day reveal the true secrets of Yestin's bardic lineage.

Yestin's magic falls into three strands: magic to aid him in his travels, magic to support his music, and magic to help solve the riddles in which Taliesin involves him. Yestin maintains strong ties with his mater Ffanci ferch Fflam of Jerbiton.

<span id="yestin-at-gauntlet"></span>
=== ''Yestin at Gauntlet'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per 0, Pre +1, Com +2, Str –1, Sta 0, Dex +1, Qik 0

'''Size''': 0

'''Age''': 25 (25) '''Decrepitude''': 0

'''Warping Score''': 0 (0)

'''Confidence Score''': 1 (3)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift; Affinity with Imaginem, Free Expression, Minor Magical Focus (music), Performance Magic (Music), Puissant Music*, Well Traveled; Plagued by Supernatural Entity (Taliesin), Twilight Prone; Delusion (Thinks himself to be part of a forgotten pre-Diedne lineage), Noncombatant

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits''': Gregarious +2, Cheerful +1, Determined +1

'''Reputations''': None

'''Combat''':

''Dodge:'' Init +0, Attack N/A, Defense +0, Damage N/A

''Fist:'' Init +0, Attack +1, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Kick:'' Init –1, Attack +1, Defense –1, Damage +2

''Bludgeon:'' Init –1, Attack +3, Defense +0, Damage +1

'''Soak''': +0

'''Fatigue Levels''': OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities''': Artes Liberales 1 (ceremonial magic), Carouse 2 (entertaining), Charm 2 (with song), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), English 2 (poetry), Etiquette 1 (court), Finesse 2 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 2 (judging the mood of the audience), Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Magic Theory 4 (Imaginem), Music 2+2 (sing), Norman French 2 (poetry), Parma Magica 1 (Mentem), Penetration 1 (Mentem), Philosophiae 1 (ceremonial magic), Stonehenge Lore 1 (legends), Welsh 5 (storytelling)

'''Arts''': '''Cr''' 10, '''In''' 2, '''Mu''' 1, '''Pe''' 2, '''Re''' 7, '''An''' 2, '''Aq''' 0, '''Au''' 0, '''Co''' 01, '''He''' 2, '''Ig''' 0, '''Im''' 4, '''Me''' 10, '''Te''' 0, '''Vi''' 1

'''Twilight Scars''': None

'''Equipment''': Crwth and bow

'''Encumbrance''': 0 (0)

'''Spells Known''':

''The Magic Flute'' (CrHe 5/+12)

''Heal Thy Broken Voice'' (CrHe 20/+14)

''Let the Sun Not Bother Me This Day'' (PeIg

10/+2)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+4)

''Confound the Rival Singer'' (MuIm 4/+6*) ''Notes of a Delightful Sound'' (MuIm 10/+5)

''The Welcome Stranger'' (CrMe 15/+20)

''To Sing of Good Meat and Drink'' (CrMe 25/+30*)

''The Call to Slumber'' (ReMe 10/+17)

''The Well-Trodden Path'' (ReTe 10/+7)

''Sense of Faerie Power'' (InVi 2/+1)

''Sense of Infernal Power'' (InVi 2/+1)

''Sense of Magical Power'' (InVi 2/+1)

\* includes Magical Focus

'''Vis''': Yestin usually carries a handful of vis of various Techniques and Forms, to offer as gifts or payments to other magi he knows.

'''Appearance''': Yestin has fair hair, which he wears brushed forward, and his eyes sparkle out from a plain and open face that rarely loses its broad smile. He normally wears simple clothes well suited to the life of a traveler, but his wizardly robes are bright and woven of many colors. He is never without his crwth and its bow, and carries the instrument in a fitted leather satchel.

'''Sigil''': Yestin's spells and device effects always enjoy a moment of calm, like an intake of breath, before releasing themselves. He votes with a simple, though highly polished, wooden flute.

<span id="yestin-15-years"></span>
=== ''Yestin +15 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per 0, Pre +1, Com +2, Str –1, Sta 0, Dex +1, Qik 0

'''Size''': 0

'''Age''': 40 (36)

'''Decrepitude''': 0

'''Warping Score''': 3 (0)

'''Confidence Score''': 1 (10)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift; Affinity with Imaginem, Free Expression, Minor Magical Focus (music), Performance Magic (Music), Puissant Music*, Well Traveled; Plagued by Supernatural Entity (Taliesin), Twilight Prone; Delusion (Thinks himself to be part of a forgotten pre-Diedne lineage), Noncombatant

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits''': Gregarious +2, Cheerful +1, Determined +1

'''Reputations''': None

'''Combat''':

''Dodge:'' Init +0, Attack N/A, Defense +0, Damage N/A

''Fist:'' Init +0, Attack +1, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Kick:'' Init –1, Attack +1, Defense –1, Damage +2

''Bludgeon:'' Init –1, Attack +3, Defense +0, Damage +1

'''Soak''': +0

'''Fatigue Levels''': OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities''': Artes Liberales 1 (ceremonial magic), Carouse 2 (entertaining), Charm 2 (with song), Code of Hermes 1 (mundane relations), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), English 2 (poetry), Etiquette 1 (court), Finesse 2 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 2 (judging the mood of the audience), Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Magic Theory 4 (Imaginem), Music 2+2 (sing), Norman French 2 (poetry), Parma Magica 2 (Mentem), Penetration 1 (Mentem), Philosophiae 1 (ceremonial magic), Welsh 5 (storytelling), Stonehenge Lore 1 (legends)

'''Arts''': '''Cr''' 10, '''In''' 10, '''Mu''' 8, '''Pe''' 2, '''Re''' 13, '''An''' 11, '''Aq''' 0, '''Au''' 0, '''Co''' 10, '''He''' 11, '''Ig''' 2, '''Im''' 6, '''Me''' 10, '''Te''' 7, '''Vi''' 2

'''Twilight Scars''': His eyes glitter with many colors.

'''Equipment''': Crwth and bow

'''Encumbrance''': 0 (0)

'''Spells Known''':

''The Magic Flute'' (CrHe 5/+12)

''Heal Thy Broken Voice'' (CrHe 20/+14)

''Mend Thy Broken Strings'' (ReHe 20/+24)

''Let the Sun Not Bother Me This Day'' (PeIg 10/+2)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+4)

''Confound the Rival Singer'' (MuIm 4/+6*)

''Notes of a Delightful Sound'' (MuIm 10/+19)

''The Welcome Stranger'' (CrMe 15/+21): Mastery 1 (still casting)

''Orpheus Ballad'' (CrMe 20/+22*)

''To Sing of Good Meat and Drink'' (CrMe 25/+30*)

''The Call to Slumber'' (ReMe 10/+17)

''The Well-Trodden Path'' (ReTe 10/+7)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-71"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

''Nature's Kindest Seat'' (ReTe 25/+20) ''Sense of Faerie Power'' (InVi 2/+1) ''Sense of Infernal Power'' (InVi 2/+1)

''Sense of Magical Power'' (InVi 2/+1)

\* includes Magical Focus

'''Vis''': Yestin has taken to carrying a small pouch filled with Creo and Herbem vis to ensure he can cast ritual spells to re-

pair his crwth.

'''Appearance''': Yestin appears young for his age, thanks to his Longevity Ritual, though not unnaturally so. But his eyes do catch the firelight and twinkle and sparkle strangely.

'''Activities in the last 15 Years''': Over the last 15 years, Yestin has concentrated on improving his Arts but has also spent a number of years working towards new spells. He developed his longevity ritual, which takes the form of a brief song that Yestin must sing each morning.

<span id="yestin-30-years"></span>
=== ''Yestin +30 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per 0, Pre +1, Com +2, Str –1, Sta 0, Dex +1, Qik 0 '''Size''': 0

'''Age''': 55 (43) '''Decrepitude''': 0 '''Warping Score''': 4 (10) '''Confidence Score''': 1 (15)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift; Affinity with Imaginem, Free Expression, Minor Magical Focus (music), Performance Magic (Music), Puissant Music*, Well Traveled; Plagued by Supernatural Entity (Taliesin), Twilight Prone; Delusion (Thinks himself to be part of a forgotten pre-Diedne lineage), Noncombatant

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits''': Gregarious +2, Cheerful +1, Determined +1

'''Reputations''': Fine Singer 1 (Stonehenge) '''Combat''':

''Dodge:'' Init +0, Attack N/A, Defense +0, Damage N/A

''Fist:'' Init +0, Attack +1, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Kick:'' Init –1, Attack +1, Defense –1, Damage +2

''Bludgeon:'' Init –1, Attack +3, Defense +0, Damage +1

'''Soak''': +0

'''Fatigue Levels''': OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11– 15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities''': Artes Liberales 2 (ceremonial magic), Carouse 2 (entertaining), Charm 2 (with song), Code of Hermes 1 (mundane relations), Concentration 2 (spell concentration), English 2 (poetry), Etiquette 2 (court), Finesse 2 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 2 (judging the mood of the audience), Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Magic Theory 6 (Imaginem), Music 3+2 (sing), Norman French 2 (poetry), Parma Magica 3 (Mentem), Penetration 2 (Mentem), Philosophiae 2 (ceremonial magic), Welsh 5 (storytelling), Stonehenge Lore 2 (legends)

'''Arts''': '''Cr''' 10, '''In''' 15, '''Mu''' 12, '''Pe''' 3, '''Re''' 13, '''An''' 11, '''Aq''' 0, '''Au''' 1, '''Co''' 10, '''He''' 11, '''Ig''' 10, '''Im''' 10, '''Me''' 10, '''Te''' 10, '''Vi''' 10

'''Twilight Scars''': Eyes glitter with many colors; Hair appears made of shining copper threads.

'''Equipment''': Crwth of Yestin talisman (as described later), Cloak of Wilderness Refuge

'''Encumbrance''': 0 (0)

'''Spells Known''':

''The Magic Flute'' (CrHe 5/+21)

''Heal Thy Broken Voice'' (CrHe 20/+25)

''Mend Thy Broken Strings'' (ReHe 20/+24)

''Let This Fire Sing You to Sleep'' (MuIg(Im) 25/+32*)

''Let the Sun Not Bother Me This Day'' (PeIg 10/+13)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+25)

''Confound the Rival Singer'' (MuIm 4/+32*)

''Notes of a Delightful Sound'' (MuIm 10/+22)

''The Welcome Stranger'' (CrMe 15/+21): Mastery 1 (still casting)

''Orpheus' Ballad'' (CrMe 20/+30*)

''To Sing of Good Meat and Drink'' (CrMe 25/+30*)

''The Call to Slumber'' (ReMe 10/+23)

''The Wisdom of Sleep'' (InTe(Vi) 25/+25)

''The Well-Trodden Path'' (ReTe 10/+23)

''Nature's Kindest Seat'' (ReTe 25/+23)

''Sense of Faerie Power'' (InVi 2/+26**)

''Sense of Infernal Power'' (InVi 2/+26**)

''Sense of Magical Power'' (InVi 2/+26**)

\* includes Magical Focus

\** includes talisman attunement bonus

'''Vis''': Yestin has taken to carrying a small pouch filled with Creo and Herbem vis to ensure he can cast ritual spells to repair his crwth.

'''Talisman''': Rowan crwth as described later. '''Appearance''': Due to bouts of Twilight,

Yestin's eyes glitter with a light all their own, and his hair is threaded through with copper.

<span id="magi-of-hermes-72"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

'''Activities in the last 15 Years''': Yestin has spent the last 15 years practicing his music, in addition to creating a number of items. He also opened and attuned his crwth and bow as his talisman, into which he enchanted all the effects described later. He has added only a few spells to his repertoire, and these only in the last few years.

<span id="yestin-45-years"></span>
=== ''Yestin +45 Years'' ===

'''Characteristics''': Int +2, Per 0, Pre +1, Com +2, Str –1, Sta 0, Dex +1, Qik 0

'''Size''': 0

'''Age''': 70 (54)

'''Decrepitude''': 0

'''Warping Score''': 5 (15)

'''Confidence Score''': 1 (15)

'''Virtues and Flaws''': The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift; Affinity with Imaginem, Free Expression, Minor Magical Focus (music), Performance Magic (Music), Puissant Music*, Well Traveled; Plagued by Supernatural Entity (Taliesin), Twilight Prone; Delusion (Thinks himself to be part of a forgotten pre-Diedne lineage), Noncombatant

\* House Virtue

'''Personality Traits''': Determined +2, Gregarious +0, Cheerful +1

'''Reputations''': Fine Singer 2 (Stonehenge &amp; Normandy), Diedne Sympathizer 2 (Stonehenge)

<span id="combat-8"></span>
==== '''Combat''': ====

''Dodge:'' Init +0, Attack N/A, Defense +0, Damage N/A

''Fist:'' Init +0, Attack +1, Defense +0, Damage –1

''Kick:'' Init –1, Attack +1, Defense –1, Damage +2

''Bludgeon:'' Init –1, Attack +3, Defense +0, Damage +1

'''Soak''': +0

'''Fatigue Levels''': OK, 0, –1, –3, –5, Unconscious

'''Wound Penalties''': –1 (1–5), –3 (6–10), –5 (11–15), Incapacitated (16–20), Dead (21+)

'''Abilities''': Artes Liberales 2 (ceremonial magic), Carouse 2 (entertaining), Charm 2 (with song), Code of Hermes 2 (mundane relations), Concentration 3 (spell concentration), English 2 (poetry), Etiquette 2 (court), Finesse 3 (Imaginem), Folk Ken 3 (judging the mood of the audience), Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Magic Theory 8 (Imaginem), Music 4+2

'''Arts''': '''Cr''' 10, '''In''' 15, '''Mu''' 12, '''Pe''' 4, '''Re''' 15, '''An''' 11, '''Aq''' 0, '''Au''' 2, '''Co''' 10, '''He''' 11, '''Ig''' 10, '''Im''' 10, '''Me''' 15, '''Te''' 10, '''Vi''' 15

'''Twilight Scars''': Eyes glitter with many colors; His hair appears made of shining copper threads.

'''Equipment''': Crwth of Yestin talisman (as described later), Cloak of Wilderness Refuge, Spear of Lleu, a bag full of Song Stones.

'''Encumbrance''': 0 (0)

'''Spells Known''':

''The Magic Flute'' (CrHe 5/+21)

''Heal Thy Broken Voice'' (CrHe 20/+23)

''Mend Thy Broken Strings'' (ReHe 20/+26)

''Let This Fire Sing You to Sleep'' (MuIg(Im) 25/+32*)

''Let the Sun Not Bother Me This Day'' (PeIg 10/+14)

''Prying Eyes'' (InIm 5/+25)

''Confound the Rival Singer'' (MuIm 4/+32*)

''Notes of a Delightful Sound'' (MuIm 10/+32)

''The Welcome Stranger'' (CrMe 15/+27): Mastery 2 (quiet casting, still casting)

''Orpheus' Ballad'' (CrMe 20/+30*)

''To Sing of Good Meat and Drink'' (CrMe 25/+35*)

''The Call to Slumber'' (ReMe 10/+30)

''Lay Your Burdens on Me'' (ReMe 20/+30)

''The Wisdom of Sleep'' (InTe(Vi) 25/+25)

''The Well-Trodden Path'' (ReTe 10/+25) ''Nature's Kindest Seat'' (ReTe 25/+25)

''Sense of Faerie Power'' (InVi 2/+31***)

''Sense of Infernal Power'' (InVi 2/+31***)

''Sense of Magical Power'' (InVi 2/+31***)

''A Song of All These Faerie Places'' (In(Cr)Vi(Im) 25/+31* **)

''A Song of All These Infernal Places'' (In(Cr)Vi(Im) 25/+31* **)

''A Song of All These Magical Places'' (In(Cr)Vi(Im) 25/+31* **)

\* includes Magical Focus

\** includes talisman attunement bonus

'''Vis''': Yestin has taken to carrying a small pouch filled with Creo and Herbem vis to ensure he can cast ritual spells to repair his crwth.

'''Talisman''': Rowan crwth as described later.

'''Appearance''': A man in his mid-fifties, though apparently in rude good health. Yestin's eyes still glitter in the light and the copper in his graying hair is becoming ever more pronounced.

'''Activities in the last 15 Years''': Yestin started to keep his distance from others of the Order during this stage of his life, as word about his unusual beliefs spread. Despite this he did engage a Verditius to create a spear for his newly employed shield grog, and he still found time to create a number of Song Stones to give as gifts to magi and mundanes alike. But his own magical studies have extended only so far as creating spells that allow him and his companions to more easily traverse regio boundaries.

<span id="new-spells-12"></span>
= ''New Spells'' =

Many of Yestin's early spells have actually been passed down through generations of itinerant Jerbiton musicians. Others were invented as part of his magical training when his mater, Ffanci ferch Fflam, guided him in the laboratory.

<span id="herbam-spells-7"></span>
=== ''Herbam Spells'' ===

<span id="the-magic-flute"></span>
=== '''The Magic Flute''' ===

CrHe 5

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

This spell conjures a carved wooden flute into the hands of the caster. The flute appears just as the caster wishes, although casting requisites are required for flutes decorated with materials belonging to forms other than Herbam, such as the animal horn often used for embellishments.

Having only Concentration Duration, the flute is entirely magical and will disappear at the end of the spell's duration, essentially when Yestin finishes playing it. Yestin benefits from his Performance Magic Virtue when casting this spell, as the act of playing the flute stands in for his concentration.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc)

<span id="heal-thy-broken-voice"></span>
==== '''Heal Thy Broken Voice''' ====

CrHe 20

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

This ritual spell mends a damaged wooden musical instrument. The instrument

<span id="magi-of-hermes-73"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

is returned to the peak of its former condition; that is, the height of its playing life after the instrument had matured and settled, and before decay or accident had affected it. The instrument is also cleaned of all dirt by this spell, as that helps bring it closer to its ideal.

Instruments that have more than one part, such as a fiddle and its original bow, are treated as the same item and are both repaired so long as all parts are present at the

<span id="new-guideline-crhe-15"></span>
=== ''New Guideline: CrHe 15'' ===

Restore a manufactured wooden item that has been damaged to the peak of its capabilities. This spell can also restore decay, but the damage must be light.

ritual's casting.

A badly made instrument cannot be repaired beyond the height of its playing life, so it retains any flaws it had before it was damaged. An enchanted instrument can be made whole again, but any magical enchantments lost as a result of damage are not restored.

This spell has a base level of 15 by analogy with the Creo Corpus guidelines, allowing the healing of &quot;light&quot; damage. Casting requisites are needed for instruments with any non-Herbam components (cat-gut, horse hair, metal pins, etc).

(Base 15, +1 Touch)

<span id="mend-thy-broken-strings"></span>
==== '''Mend Thy Broken Strings''' ====

ReHe 20

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

With all the required parts and/or materials of a musical instrument present, the caster uses Rego magic to repair it, including re-stringing, straightening warped wood, or any other fix that could be applied by a craftsman. The spell cannot repair splintered or broken wood, but it can reassemble or replace old parts if new materials are available. The spell cannot create any required materials that are not present.

This spell uses the Rego Craft Magic rules from ''Covenants'', page 49, and so the results of the spell depend on the magus's Finesse as described in the table.

Casting requisites are required for non-Herbam components.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Complexity)

<span id="ignem-spells-7"></span>
=== ''Ignem Spells'' ===

<span id="let-this-fire-sing-you-to-sleep"></span>
==== '''Let This Fire Sing You to Sleep''' ====

MuIg(Im) 25

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Part

This spell affects a single fire, turning the very tips of the flames into pleasing music. The caster decides the kind of music he wishes to hear (a ballad, a whirly jig, etc.), and the spell accommodates. The music of the flames always incorporates a signature refrain, as though a sigil, with each casting. But the mood of that same refrain is adapted to the needs of the song.

The flames play the same music all the while the fire burns, getting louder as the fire burns brighter, hotter, or larger, though the random nature of fire and differences in fuel mean that no two castings ever produce exactly the same performance.

The spell ends when the flame is extinguished, its original source is fully destroyed or, for particularly long-burning fires, when the spell's Sun Duration naturally expires. This spell cannot affect a fire that is already larger than a campfire or a fire in a hearth (essentially, any fire doing +5 damage), but a fire that grows larger than this retains the magic.

Yestin originally designed this spell so that his fire, whether on the road or in his sanctum, could gently sing him to sleep. But the more he explored this new spell, the more he found new uses for it. It wasn't just music that the flames could produce, but also speech (though limited in the range of words and voice to little more than those the caster imagines as he casts the spell) or other natural and unnatural sounds. These sounds always adopt the rhythm of the spell's original melody, though. If left to sing (or talk) of its own volition, with no guidance from the caster, the fire sounds as

though it is forming words, but this is an illusion; the sounds form true words by accident if at all.

Yestin has used this spell in his sanctum to experiment with different harmonies, and has on occasion established choirs of candles each quietly singing a different refrain or a different note. The effect can be mesmerizing.

A Finesse Stress roll (Mastery of the spell reduces this to a simple roll) determines how pleasant the sound is, but the size of the fire determines how loud it is.

A candle flame A whisper A burning torch A conversation

'''Size of Fire Equivalent Sound'''

A campfire A song or heated discussion

This spell has the side effect of reducing the intensity of the target fire by 1 as flame is turned to sound.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

<span id="let-the-sun-not-bother-me-this-day"></span>
== '''Let the Sun Not Bother Me This Day''' ==

PeIg 10

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

This spell cools the caster to a comfortable level, no matter how hot the sun is or how long he stays out in it. As Yestin puts it, &quot;the day becomes as pleasant as a spring afternoon, and loses the wrath of summer's heat&quot;. The target is still affected by the light of the sun, but its warmth is regulated. All other sources of heat affect the caster naturally.

This spell ends either when it reaches its natural duration, when the caster moves into a fully enclosed room (or cavern system or basement), or in the event of an eclipse; it ends when he goes anywhere that sunlight cannot reach him.

Petalichus the Weaver of Verditius bought a copy of this spell from Yestin when the bard travelled to the Tribunal of Thebes one year. The Verditius claimed to be interested &quot;from a research point of view.&quot; Unknown to Yestin, Petalichus ultimately used the spell in a long-running feud with Solar Magnus of Tytalus, a feud that ended in Stonehenge with the death of Solar Magnus.

(Base 4, +2 Sun)

<span id="magi-of-hermes-74"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

<span id="imaginem-spells-7"></span>
=== ''Imaginem Spells'' ===

<span id="confound-the-rival-singer"></span>
=== '''Confound the Rival Singer''' ===

MuIm 5

R: Sight, D: Conc, T: Ind

A somewhat mischievous spell, Yestin devised this in order to give himself an unfair advantage over his mundane rivals. The target of the spell is a singer's voice (or the sound produced by a single musical instrument), and the spell allows the caster to pull that voice in all manner of directions. For example, it pulls notes higher, pushes them lower, draws them out longer, or cuts them off sharply.

As the caster must anticipate the music or song as it is being performed, the spell requires a Finesse roll to affect the sound to a greater or lesser degree. On a high Finesse roll (9 or higher), the caster is able to change words within the song, or change entire chords within the music. At the lowest level, the caster is able to at least change some of the music to bad notes or add a croak in the voice.

'''Finesse Roll:''' 3+

'''Effect:''' Causes occasional breaks in the voice or the random bad or missed note.

'''Finesse Roll:''' 6+

'''Effect:''' The caster can choose to manipulate the performance such that it appears to simply be a good player on a bad night. The target voice might sound strained or croaky, and instruments may sound in need of tuning.

'''Finesse Roll:''' 9+

'''Effect:''' The caster can make the singer sound tone deaf, flattening a performance or pitching the music off key.

'''Finesse Roll:''' 12+

'''Effect:''' The caster achieves a fine level of control, and can even change words within a song to any other words of his choosing.

If the caster is familiar with the song or the piece of music, he may add his Music score to his Finesse roll as there is less need to anticipate the performance.

It may be possible to apply the spell to the spoken word, perhaps to an orator or a tutor as he addresses an audience, although Yestin has not yet experimented with this.

(Base 1, +3 Sight, +1 Conc)

<span id="mentem-spells-6"></span>
=== ''Mentem Spells'' ===

<span id="the-welcome-stranger"></span>
=== '''The Welcome Stranger''' ===

CrMe 15

R: Eye, D: Diameter, T: Ind

This spell inserts a recollection of the caster into the target's memory. The memory itself soon fades, but its fleeting presence is usually enough to reassure the target that he has met the caster before.

The nature and context of the memory is determined when the spell is cast.

Even fond or favorable memories are not enough to counteract the effects of The Gift, but the guidelines in '''ArM5''', page 76, give an idea how the memory of an established relationship influences behavior.

In later years, Yestin mastered this spell such that he can cast it both quietly and without the normal Hermetic gestures.

(Base 5, +1 Eye, +1 Diameter)

<span id="orpheus-ballad"></span>
==== '''Orpheus' Ballad''' ====

CrMe 20

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Group

The spell creates a momentary flash of intense unnatural fear, despair, and woe in the minds of the assailants, attacking their estimation (''Art &amp; Academe'', page 32). Each target in turn, starting from the target closest to the caster, attempts a Brave Personality Roll against an Ease Factor of 9 or flees the scene. This roll is modified by –1 for each other member of the group who fails his roll; the more who flee, the less resolve the others have.

The magic of the spell is carried on the caster's own scream, and extends out as far as the caster's voice would normally carry at a high volume (in excess of 50 paces). The magic of the spell affects the group of individuals in front of and closest to the caster. The individuals must still constitute a group as per '''ArM5''', page 113.

Yestin devised the spell after he was set upon by brigands along the road from Winchester to the Isle of Oxney near Rye. He was lucky to escape their clutches after their first meeting, and ensured that he was prepared for their next.

The spell is named for all the grief suffered by Orpheus, who lost so much on leaving the underworld.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +2 Group)

<span id="to-sing-of-good-meat-and-drink"></span>
= '''To Sing of Good Meat and Drink''' =

CrMe 25

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Room

Yestin invented this spell in order to reward innkeepers and taverners who showed generosity to him as he explored Stonehenge and beyond. He often weaves this spell into his evening's performance, using his Performance Magic to hide the casting within his music.

It has the effect of making those in the room somewhat thirsty and hungry. Those with a Compulsion (Personality Flaw) for eating and/or drinking are powerless to resist and must eat or drink as soon as they can. Others need to make a Personality Check against an Ease Factor of 6 to resist the temptation, assuming they wish to resist it.

The effect is largely gentle and is designed to go unnoticed, beyond the takings over the bar seeing a marked increase. Yestin always uses forceless casting to ensure the spell has no Penetration, and so will not affect magi.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +2 Room)

<span id="lay-your-burdens-on-me"></span>
==== '''Lay Your Burdens on Me''' ====

ReMe 20

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

This spell brings the target's secrets bubbling to the top of his consciousness, playing on his mind and making him more inclined to disclose them.

For the purposes of this spell, secrets are those things that gnaw at the target's conscience in the face of questioning those things that the target would normally strive to keep hidden because of guilt or shame or fear. Secrets kept for noble reasons are not affected by this spell, which was a conscious design decision made by Yestin. This spell does not make the target susceptible to questioning on other matters, and so cannot be used to assist directed interrogation.

At the end of the spell's duration, the target must make a personality roll against an Ease Factor of 6. If the target succeeds, she maintains control over her secret and keeps it hidden. The troupe should agree which Personality trait the target uses in the roll.

For each subsequent day that the spell is cast on the target, the Ease Factor increases by 1. Virtues and Flaws may modify ''Magi of Hermes''

the roll and/or the Ease Factor, with the Storyguide's agreement.

If the personality check fails, the target falls prey to his conscience and seeks someone to confide in. That person may not necessarily be the caster of the spell, and will most likely be someone the target feels he can trust.

The Infernal and the Dominion have a strong impact on this spell, dealing as they do with the moral aspects of human life. If the target spends time in the Dominion, the light of the Lord helps to release the truth and the level of the aura is subtracted from the target's roll. The aura's Temper (see ''Realms of Power: The Divine'', page 38) also has an effect with Brave, Wise, Strong, or Just Tempers, increasing the aura's effect by 1.

If the target spends the duration of the spell within an Infernal aura, the corrupting influence of the aura reinforces the target's resolve to keep the secret. The level of the aura is added to the target's roll. The Storyguide may impose a further bonus to the roll based on any Tarnish or Corruption of the Infernal aura (see ''Realms of Power: The Infernal'', page 13).

Yestin invented this spell as a means to more easily solve those mysteries that the spirit Taliesin led him into; mysteries often solved by knowing what those involved wished to hide.

(Base 5, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

<span id="terram-spells-6"></span>
=== ''Terram Spells'' ===

<span id="the-wisdom-of-sleep"></span>
==== '''The Wisdom of Sleep''' ====

InTe(Vi) 25

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

The caster sleeps with the target object beneath his pillow, and his dreams then inform him of all mundane properties of that object. The magic is of Momentary Duration, but the sleeping mind is more able to assimilate the huge amount of information that might be called up, weaving it into the caster's dreams throughout the night. Note that this spell does not allow the caster to actually talk with the object or divine any secrets that the object may store in whatever passes for its intelligence.

This spell uses Terram in its all-encompassing form referencing all solid objects, and requires casting requisites appropriate for the target object.

The Vim requisite allows the spell to inform the caster of any active or any recent magical effects on the object. This spell is restricted to effects originating from the Magic Realm. Enchantments inherent to the object are not learned beyond a knowledge that some form of enchantment exists.

Yestin's version of this spell sees him conversing with the object within his dreams, wherein the object adopts a persona (or rather, Yestin's dream ascribes a personality to the object). Multiple castings of this spell on multiple objects are possible, though the caster's pillow as well as his dreams may become a little crowded.

The quirkiness of the spell effect is due to experimentation. Yestin had intended for a more conventional spell, but he found towards the end of his experiments that the spell's incantation wasn't complete until the caster fell asleep. His Laboratory Text for this spell carries the same flaw. It's possible that practitioners and researchers of Dream Magic may be interested in Yestin's text for this spell, as it may further their own magical aims.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +1 Vim Requisite)

<span id="the-well-trodden-path"></span>
==== '''The Well-Trodden Path''' ====

ReTe 10

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Part

As the caster walks, this spell shifts the earth underfoot allowing him to travel over rutted paths and uneven roads as though they were flat and even. The earth returns to its prior position after the target of the spell has passed. The spell ends when the caster comes to a stop, such as to rest, or crosses terrain unaffected by this spell, such as a wooden bridge or a ford.

This spell has little effect on soft or muddy paths, as the earth must still be able to bear the target's weight. The spell is potent enough to move stones and cobbles in the road.

A traveler using this spell does not suffer undue delay for traveling over poor roads. Traveling at speed to cover more ground in the day still costs the stated Long-Term Fatigue level. ''City &amp; Guild'', page 85, provides more detail on travel speeds. Targets affected by this spell use speeds close to the top end of the applicable travel speeds.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +1 Part, +1 stone)

<span id="natures-kindest-seat"></span>
==== '''Nature's Kindest Seat''' ====

ReTe 25

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group

This spell conjures a group of seats from the ground, centered on the point the user touches. The number of chairs the spell produces can be controlled by the caster, summoning up to ten.

The chairs rise from the ground and each molds itself to the nearest person as he sits back. Each chair is always at least passably comfortable, but notably more so when cast in a meadow with lush grass. Each chair sinks slowly back into the ground, leaving no trace, as the spell nears the end of its duration. The spell only works on sand or soil, a limitation Yestin aims to fix some time in the future.

Yestin decided that, to better capture an audience and draw them into the music, there was nothing like a little peripheral magic to increase anticipation. Yestin has never been shy about using his magic.

Yestin's sigil manifesting in this spell can occasionally take his audience by surprise, as at first nothing seems to happen … and then the chairs spring from the ground.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Group, +1 Complexity)

<span id="vim-spells-5"></span>
=== ''Vim Spells'' ===

<span id="a-song-of-all-these-faerie-places"></span>
= '''A Song of All These Faerie Places''' =

In(Cr)Vi(Im) 25

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Group

When the caster stands at a place where the boundary between levels of a faerie regio can be crossed easily, he is able to sing a song or play music that describes the scene on the other side of the regio boundary.

As the song sings of each feature on the other side of the boundary, they become clearer in the visual illusion. They then fade slightly as the song moves onto the next feature. For example, where the first line of the song describes the lush grass, in the higher level the grass becomes visible through the boundary, bright and clear. As the next line describes the dry stone wall surrounding the meadow, the wall appears in the illusion but the grass becomes more misty and distant.

Those able to see the illusion are also able to pass through from one regio level to

As the caster must be standing exactly at the point where the regio layers meet and form a boundary, this spell can rarely be used to actually discern the location of that boundary.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Group, +1 Creo requisite, +1 Imaginem requisite)

<span id="a-song-of-all-these-infernal-places"></span>
= '''A Song of All These Infernal Places''' =

In(Cr)Vi(Im) 25

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Group

As ''A Song of All These Faerie Places'' but affecting Infernal regio boundaries.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Group, +1 Creo requisite, +1 Imaginem requisite)

<span id="a-song-of-all-these-magical-places"></span>
== '''A Song of All These Magical Places''' ==

In(Cr)Vi(Im) 25

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Group

As ''A Song of All These Faerie Places'' but affecting Magic regio boundaries.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Group, +1 Creo requisite, +1 Imaginem requisite)

<span id="enchanted-items-13"></span>
= ''Enchanted Items'' =

Yestin has created the following items.

<span id="cloak-of-wilderness-refuge"></span>
=== ''Cloak of Wilderness Refuge'' ===

As Yestin aged, he began to enjoy sleeping out under the stars less and less. It wasn't so much the effort of carrying a tent around with him that he objected to, but rather having to put it up. This lesser enchanted woollen cloak is the result.

<span id="an-instant-roof"></span>
==== '''An Instant Roof''' ====

MuAn 15 R: Per, D: Conc, T: Ind Pen +0, 1/day

When triggered, the cloak expands and reforms into a large tent complete with tentpoles (formed from the polished bone toggle used to fasten the cloak) to keep it rigid. The tent is large enough to allow three to camp inside in relative comfort. The effect is triggered and canceled by a train of tonguetwisting words in Welsh.

(Base 5, +1 Conc; +5 item maintains concentration)

<span id="song-stones"></span>
=== ''Song Stones'' ===

These small stones are charged items that store a song or music within themselves, which can then be released later. Yestin usually paints his song-stones in bright colors, and tends to give them freely to friends as amusements.

The spirit Taliesin once led Yestin to Phessalia of Voluntas, where he saw a Laboratory Text for enchanting stones or beads such that they could display an image when called upon. Though he could not obtain a copy of that text, he took the idea away with him. Phessalia herself enchanted beads with pictures that projected themselves onto a wall. She apparently made little use of them beyond ensuring she had sufficient ammunition to embarrass those close to her.

It had always been Yestin's dream to follow the ancient bardic lineage he felt himself part of, and enchant ephemeral things like his music. These stones, with their magical songs bound by an arcane symbol, seemed to him a first step on a longer journey. Shortly after he first invented these, his travels became more directed as he searched for the ancient druidic and bardic magic that would support his new research.

<span id="store-the-song-in-stone"></span>
==== '''Store the Song in Stone''' ====

CrIm 3

R: Per, D: Diameter, T: Ind

Charged Item, 0 Penetration, 1/day

This spell captures a song or other music sung while a small stone is enchanted, and imprisons it within. The song is of a quality equal to the creator's Communication

<span id="magi-of-hermes-75"></span>
=== ''Magi of Hermes'' ===

* Music total, and is always of a tone and content chosen by the creator. The creator can freely change the &quot;voice&quot; that sings with each stone, but must make a Finesse roll as described in '''ArM5''', page 143, to determine how accurately he can mimic a known voice other than his own.

When the stone is asked to sing or to speak its message, the song is freed and its music can be heard. Once the song is released, it becomes ephemeral and cannot be recaptured unless by some other magic. The stone becomes just another stone.

(Base 1, +1 Diameter, +1 intelligible speech)

<span id="the-spear-of-lleu"></span>
=== ''The Spear of Lleu'' ===

With his advancing years, Yestin became less trusting of his brothers across the Order and took to employing a bodyguard to whom he entrusted this spear. He commissioned the Spear of Lleu from a Verditius working on the Isle of Oxney, a man rumored to have visited the forge of Wayland Smith himself.

<span id="neither-rock-nor-steel"></span>
=== '''Neither Rock nor Steel''' ===

PeTe 26 R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Part Pen +22, 1/day

This Perdo Terram effect is able to destroy rock or metal on contact, and is what gives the weapon its name. According to legend, Lleu Llaw Gyffes, seeking revenge on Gronw Pebr for attempting to kill him with a spear, allowed Gronw to hold a great rock between him and Lleu's spear. But so hard did Lleu throw his spear that it tore through the rock and killed Gronw where he stood.

The effect is triggered by being plunged into metal armor. The target armor is instantly weakened, rusting and fracturing in the blink of an eye, and the spear pierces the armor and ignores its contribution to Soak. Against subsequent attacks, the armor has its Soak bonus reduced to half.

The Target for this spell is Part, allowing it to affect a quantity of material equivalent to Individual, even where the whole is larger than a standard Individual — a great giant's stone armor for instance.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Part, +2 Base Metal; +11 Penetration)

<span id="the-telling-blow"></span>
=== '''The Telling Blow''' ===

PeCo 34 R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind Pen +22, 6/day

Also enchanted into the Spear of Lleu, this effect inflicts a Heavy Wound on a human or humanoid target of up to Size +1. It is triggered when the blade comes into contact with a target and the haft is twisted in the wielder's hands. The blade does not have to draw blood, meaning that great care must be taken when carrying this weapon.

(base 15, +1 Touch; +3 6/day, +11 Penetration)

<span id="talisman-crwth-of-yestin"></span>
= ''Talisman: Crwth of Yestin'' =

Yestin's talisman is his crwth and bow, a form of welsh harp played either with a bow or by plucking the strings. It was inevitable that his treasured crwth would become his talisman. A gift from his mater, the crwth has been with him since before his Gauntlet and its music has been a constant companion.

Its attunements are as per the lyre and rowan wood. These are all Yestin currently knows of, but he is keen to find out whether the crwth contains more magical sympathies that are currently hidden from him. He may one day seek out a specialist in the field so he can further attune his talisman.

<span id="attunements-6"></span>
==== '''Attunements''' ====

* +3 create sounds
* +5 affect music
* +4 protection against malicious magic
* +1 Vim

<span id="a-song-to-banish-the-darkness"></span>
== '''A Song to Banish the Darkness''' ==

ReVi 41 R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Room Pen +22, 1/day

When so instructed, the crwth plays a warding melody that fills the room and prevents creatures of the Infernal from entering. The effective level of the ward is 20, and it uses a Penetration of 22. Creatures within the room when the melody plays are not expelled from the room, but nor can they willingly leave.

The song is incidental to the effect, and Yestin is able to quiet the song by concentrating. This does not end the effect, and the music can be restarted again by concentrating. The crwth maintains concentration on the effect, and &quot;sings the song&quot; independently of any other music it produces.

(Base 20, –1 Conc, +2 Room; +5 item maintains concentration, +11 Penetration)

<span id="a-song-to-banish-the-impish"></span>
= '''A Song to Banish the Impish''' =

ReVi 41 R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Room Pen +22, 1/day

As ''A Song to Banish the Darkness'', but works on creatures aligned to the Faerie Realm.

(Base 20, –1 Conc, +2 Room; +5 levels item maintains concentration, +11 Penetration)

<span id="a-song-to-banish-the-mystical"></span>
= '''A Song to Banish the Mystical''' =

ReVi 41 R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Room Pen +22, 1/day

As ''A Song to Banish the Darkness'', but works on creatures aligned to the Magic Realm.

(Base 20, –1 Conc, +2 Room; +5 item maintains concentration, +11 penetration)

<span id="your-voice-and-mine"></span>
=== '''Your Voice and Mine''' ===

CrIm 15 R: Per, D: Conc, T: Ind Pen +0, 12/day

This effect is restricted such that only Yestin is able to trigger it.

This effect allows the crwth to join its voice with Yestin's. The crwth sings in harmony with Yestin, as Yestin himself plays and sings. The effect is designed to produce intelligible words. These usually follow Yestin's own words but on some occasions, and for reasons Yestin does not know, the crwth changes words and tone and emphasis. These changes are always in keeping with the song, and serve to enhance the performance rather than detract from it.

The best explanation Yestin has heard for this phenomenon is that perhaps a Twilight experience also affected the crwth. Any magus able to explain why the crwth sings so independently would have Yestin's thanks, and may perhaps gain a deeper insight into the nature of enchanted devices.

Adelbert the Tyrolean, a Bonisagus of some standing at Yestin's covenant, suggested that a supernatural agent may have been present in Yestin's laboratory when the effect was instilled, and that perhaps this caused the Warped effect. Yestin is unsure how much the Tyrolean suspects about Taliesin, but is disinclined to have others disturb his laboratory in search of evidence of faerie involvement.

(Base 1, +1 Conc, +1 intelligible speech; +4 12/day, +5 item maintains concentration, +3 effect restricted to Yestin)
